® CAMBRIDGE
Official
Cambridge
Exam
Preparation
IELTS
ACADEMIC

16
WITH ANSWERS

AUTHENTIC PRACTICE TESTS
Produced by Cambridge Exams Publishing

• •

WSWK. 16.
M^llHA^DNU. - SA	2021.6
S^INl^: Cambridge IEUTS 16 (Academic)
ISBN 978-7-5193-0649-6
I. (DA- II. DU- III. CDielts-aI^I IV.
®H310.41-44
ZUchrKSRCIPUKUA ( 2021 ) K060098-V-
WNML: VA01—2021—1321H-
This is a reprint of the following title published by Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge IELTS 16 (Academic) (ISBN: 9781108933858)
Cambridge University Press and Cambridge Assessment 2021
This reprint for the People’s Republic of China (excluding Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) is published by
arrangement with the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
© Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Assessment English and Qunyan Press 2021.
This reprint is authorized for sale in the People’s Republic of China (excluding Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan) only.
Unauthorized export of this reprint is a violation of the Copyright Act. No part of this publication may be reproduced
or distributed by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of
Cambridge University Press and Qunyan Press.
(DLK^SGK.	SELL ML
DGNXRKMNKKUo
RLMS-
NMSL- U
till	till:	( 100006 )
W	till: www.qypuhlish.com (’UUSM )
AAIRU: dywhGxdf.cn qunyancbsG126.com
WNtziZ: 010-62418641 65267783 65263836
K N-
EP	ffl: SA^UEPKMWL-W
	A: 2O21^6HK1U 2021S6HKH^EpW
	787mmXiO92mm 1/16
EP	U: 9
	N: 209D-Z-
4?	-H-: ISBN 978-7-5193-0649-6
L	III: 128.00S
ljRNSrU,
010-62605166„
Contents
Introduction	4
Testi	10
Test 2	32
Test 3	55
Test 4	76
Audioscripts	98
Listening and Reading answer keys	121
Sample Writing answers	129
Sample answer sheets	139
Acknowledgements	143
3
Introduction
Prepare for the exam with practice tests from Cambridge
Inside you’ll find four authentic examination papers from Cambridge Assessment English.
They are the perfect way to practise - EXACTLY like the real exam.
Why are they unique?
All our authentic practice tests go through the same design process as the IELTS test. We
check every single part of our practice tests with real students under exam conditions, to
make sure we give you the most authentic experience possible.
Students can practise these tests on their own or with the help of a teacher to familiarise
themselves with the exam format, understand the scoring system and practise exam technique.
Further information
IELTS is jointly managed by the British Council, IDP: IELTS Australia and Cambridge
Assessment English. Further information can be found on the IELTS official website at
ielts.org.
WHAT IS THE TEST FORMAT?
IELTS consists of four components. All candidates take the same Listening and Speaking
tests. There is a choice of Reading and Writing tests according to whether a candidate is
taking the Academic or General Training module.
Academic
For candidates wishing to study at
undergraduate or postgraduate levels,
and for those seeking professional
registration.
General Training
For candidates wishing to migrate to an
English-speaking country (Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, UK), and for those wishing to
train or study below degree level.
4
Introduction
The test components are taken in the following order:
Listening
4 parts, 40 items, approximately 30 minutes
Academic Reading 3 sections, 40 items 60 minutes	or	General Training Reading 3 sections, 40 items 60 minutes
Academic Writing 2 tasks 60 minutes	or	General Training Writing 2 tasks 60 minutes
Speaking 11 to 14 minutes		
Total Test Time
2 hours 44 minutes
ACADEMIC TEST FORMAT
Listening
This test consists of four parts, each with ten questions. The first two parts are concerned
with social needs. The first part is a conversation between two speakers and the second part
is a monologue. The final two parts are concerned with situations related to educational or
training contexts. The third part is a conversation between up to four people and the fourth
part is a monologue.
A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, matching, plan/map/
diagram labelling, form completion, note completion, table completion, flow-chart completion,
summary completion, sentence completion and short-answer questions.
Candidates hear the recording once only and answer the questions as they listen. Ten
minutes are allowed at the end for candidates to transfer their answers to the answer sheet.
Reading
This test consists of three sections with 40 questions. There are three texts, which are
taken from journals, books, magazines and newspapers. The texts are on topics of general
interest. At least one text contains detailed logical argument.
A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, identifying information
(True/False/Not Given), identifying the writer’s views/claims (Yes/No/Not Given), matching
information, matching headings, matching features, matching sentence endings, sentence
completion, summary completion, note completion, table completion, flow-chart completion,
diagram-label completion and short-answer questions.
5
Introduction
Writing
This test consists of two tasks. It is suggested that candidates spend about 20 minutes on
Task 1, which requires them to write at least 150 words, and 40 minutes on Task 2, which
requires them to write at least 250 words. Task 2 contributes twice as much as Task 1 to the
Writing score.
Task 1 requires candidates to look at a diagram or some data (in a graph, table or chart)
and to present the information in their own words. They are assessed on their ability to
organise, present and possibly compare data, and are required to describe the stages of a
process, describe an object or event, or explain how something works.
In Task 2, candidates are presented with a point of view, argument or problem. They are
assessed on their ability to present a solution to the problem, present and justify an opinion,
compare and contrast evidence and opinions, and to evaluate and challenge ideas, evidence
or arguments.
Candidates are also assessed on their ability to write in an appropriate style. More
information on assessing the Writing test, including Writing assessment criteria (public
version), is available at ielts.org.
Speaking
This test takes between 11 and 14 minutes and is conducted by a trained examiner.
There are three parts:
Part 1
The candidate and the examiner introduce themselves. Candidates then answer general
questions about themselves, their home/family, their job/studies, their interests and a wide
range of similar familiar topic areas. This part lasts between four and five minutes.
Part 2
The candidate is given a task card with prompts and is asked to talk on a particular topic.
The candidate has one minute to prepare and they can make some notes if they wish,
before speaking for between one and two minutes. The examiner then asks one or two
questions on the same topic.
Part 3
The examiner and the candidate engage in a discussion of more abstract issues which are
thematically linked to the topic in Part 2. The discussion lasts between four and five minutes.
The Speaking test assesses whether candidates can communicate effectively in English.
The assessment takes into account Fluency and Coherence, Lexical Resource, Grammatical
Range and Accuracy, and Pronunciation. More information on assessing the Speaking test,
including Speaking assessment criteria (public version), is available at ielts.org.
6
Introduction
HOW IS HELTS SCORED?
IELTS results are reported on a nine-band scale. In addition to the score for overall language
ability, IELTS provides a score in the form of a profile for each of the four skills (Listening,
Reading, Writing and Speaking). These scores are also reported on a nine-band scale. All
scores are recorded on the Test Report Form along with details of the candidate’s nationality,
first language and date of birth. Each Overall Band Score corresponds to a descriptive
statement which gives a summary of the English-language ability of a candidate classified at
that level. The nine bands and their descriptive statements are as follows:
9	Expert user - Has fully operational command of the language: appropriate, accurate
and fluent with complete understanding.
8 Very good user - Has fully operational command of the language with only occasional
unsystematic inaccuracies and inappropriacies. Misunderstandings may occur in
unfamiliar situations. Handles complex detailed argumentation well.
7 Good user - Has operational command of the language, though with occasional
inaccuracies, inappropriacies and misunderstandings in some situations. Generally
handles complex language well and understands detailed reasoning.
6	Competent user - Has generally effective command of the language despite some
inaccuracies, inappropriacies and misunderstandings. Can use and understand fairly
complex language, particularly in familiar situations.
5 Modest user - Has partial command of the language, coping with overall meaning
in most situations, though is likely to make many mistakes. Should be able to handle
basic communication in own field.
4 Limited user - Basic competence is limited to familiar situations. Has frequent
problems in understanding and expression. Is not able to use complex language.
3	Extremely limited user - Conveys and understands only general meaning in very
familiar situations. Frequent breakdowns in communication occur.
2	Intermittent user - Has great difficulty understanding spoken and written English.
1 Non-user- Essentially has no ability to use the language beyond possibly a few
isolated words.
0 Did not attempt the test - Did not answer the questions.
7
Introduction
MARKING THE PRACTICE TESTS
Listening and Reading
The answer keys are on pages 121-128.
Each question in the Listening and Reading tests is worth one mark.
Questions which require letter / Roman numeral answers
For questions where the answers are letters or Roman numerals, you should write only the
number of answers required. For example, if the answer is a single letter or numeral, you
should write only one answer. If you have written more letters or numerals than are required,
the answer must be marked wrong.
Questions which require answers in the form of words or numbers
•	Answers may be written in upper or lower case.
•	Words in brackets are optional - they are correct, but not necessary.
•	Alternative answers are separated by a slash (/).
•	If you are asked to write an answer using a certain number of words and/or (a) number(s),
you will be penalised if you exceed this. For example, if a question specifies an answer
using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS and the correct answer is ‘black leather coat’,
the answer ‘coat of black leather’ is incorrect.
•	In questions where you are expected to complete a gap, you should only transfer the
necessary missing word(s) onto the answer sheet. For example, to complete ‘in the ...’,
where the correct answer is ‘morning’, the answer ‘in the morning’ would be incorrect.
•	All answers require correct spelling (including words in brackets).
•	Both US and UK spelling are acceptable and are included in the answer key.
•	All standard alternatives for numbers, dates and currencies are acceptable.
•	All standard abbreviations are acceptable.
•	You will find additional notes about individual answers in the answer key.
Writing
The sample answers are on pages 129-138. It is not possible for you to give yourself a mark
for the Writing tasks. We have provided sample answers (written by candidates), showing
their score and the examiners' comments. These sample answers will give you an insight
into what is required for the Writing test.
8
Introduction
HOW SHOULD YOU INTERPRET YOUR SCORES?
At the end of each Listening and Reading answer key you will find a chart which will help
you assess whether, on the basis of your Practice Test results, you are ready to take the
IELTS test.
In interpreting your score, there are a number of points you should bear in mind. Your
performance in the real IELTS test will be reported in two ways: there will be a Band Score
from 1 to 9 for each of the components and an Overall Band Score from 1 to 9, which is
the average of your scores in the four components. However, institutions considering your
application are advised to look at both the Overall Band Score and the Band Score for
each component in order to determine whether you have the language skills needed for a
particular course of study. For example, if your course involves a lot of reading and writing,
but no lectures, listening skills might be less important and a score of 5 in Listening might be
acceptable if the Overall Band Score was 7. However, for a course which has lots of lectures
and spoken instructions, a score of 5 in Listening might be unacceptable even though the
Overall Band Score was 7.
Once you have marked your tests, you should have some idea of whether your listening
and reading skills are good enough for you to try the IELTS test. If you did well enough in
one component, but not in others, you will have to decide for yourself whether you are ready
to take the test.
The Practice Tests have been checked to ensure that they are the same level of difficulty
as the real IELTS test. However, we cannot guarantee that your score in the Practice Tests
will be reflected in the real IELTS test. The Practice Tests can only give you an idea of your
possible future performance and it is ultimately up to you to make decisions based on your
score.
Different institutions accept different IELTS scores for different types of courses. We have
based our recommendations on the average scores which the majority of institutions accept.
The institution to which you are applying may, of course, require a higher or lower score than
most other institutions.
9
Test 1
LISTENING
PART 1 Questions 1-10
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ANDIOR A NUMBER for each answer.
Children’s Engineering Workshops
Tiny Engineers (ages 4-5)
Activities
•	Create a cover for an 1................so they can drop it from a height
without breaking it.
•	Take part in a competition to build the tallest 2.................
•	Make a 3................powered by a balloon.
Junior Engineers (ages 6-8)
Activities:
•	Build model cars, trucks and 4................and learn how to program
them so they can move.
•	Take part in a competition to build the longest 5................using card
and wood.
•	Create a short 6................with special software.
•	Build, 7................and program a humanoid robot.
Cost for a five-week block: £50
Held on 8................from 10 am to 11 am
Location
Building 10A, 9................ Industrial Estate, Grasford
Plenty of 10................is available.
10	4Op. 121 S p- 98
Listening
PART 2 Questions 11-20
Questions 11-14
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.
11	Stevenson’s was founded in
A 1923.
B 1924.
C 1926.
12	Originally, Stevenson’s manufactured goods for
A the healthcare industry.
B the automotive industry.
C the machine tools industry.
13	What does the speaker say about the company premises?
A The company has recently moved.
B The company has no plans to move.
C The company is going to move shortly.
14	The programme for the work experience group includes
A time to do research.
B meetings with a teacher.
C talks by staff.
11
Test 1
Questions 15-20
Label the map below.
Write the correct letter, A-J, next to Questions 15-20.
Plan of Stevenson’s site
15	coffee room
16	warehouse
17	staff canteen
18	meeting room
19	human resources
20	boardroom
12
-> Q p. 121 B p. 99
Listening
PART 3 Questions 21-30
Questions 21 and 22
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO parts of the introductory stage to their art projects do Jess and Tom agree
were useful?
A	the Bird Park visit
B	the workshop sessions
C the Natural History Museum visit
D the projects done in previous years
E the handouts with research sources
Questions 23 and 24
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
In which TWO ways do both Jess and Tom decide to change their proposals?
A by giving a rationale for their action plans
B by being less specific about the outcome
C by adding a video diary presentation
D by providing a timeline and a mind map
E by making their notes more evaluative
13
Test 1
Questions 25-30
Which personal meaning do the students decide to give to each of the following
pictures?
Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-H, next to
Questions 25-30.
Personal meanings	
A	a childhood memory
B	hope for the future
C	fast movement
D	a potential threat
E	the power of colour
F	the continuity of life
G	protection of nature
H	a confused attitude to nature
Pictures
25	Falcon (Landseer)
26	Fish hawk (Audubon)
27	Kingfisher (van Gogh)
28	Portrait of William Wells
29	Vairumati (Gauguin)
30	Portrait of Giovanni de Medici
14	°Z> Q p. 121 S p. 100
Listening
PART 4 Questions 31-40
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.
Stoicism
Stoicism is still relevant today because of its 31................appeal.
Ancient Stoics
® Stoicism was founded over 2,000 years ago in Greece.
c> The Stoics’ ideas are surprisingly well known, despite not being intended
for 32.................
Stoic principles
•	Happiness could be achieved by leading a virtuous life.
•	Controlling emotions was essential.
•	Epictetus said that external events cannot be controlled but the
33................people make in response can be controlled.
•	A Stoic is someone who has a different view on experiences which others would
consider as 34.................
The influence of Stoicism
® George Washington organised a 35................about Cato to motivate
his men.
•	The French artist Delacroix was a Stoic.
® Adam Smith’s ideas on 36................were influenced by Stoicism.
•	Some of today’s political leaders are inspired by the Stoics.
© Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT)
-	the treatment for 37................is based on ideas from Stoicism
-	people learn to base their thinking on 38.................
•	In business, people benefit from Stoicism by identifying obstacles as
39.................
Relevance of Stoicism
•	It requires a lot of 40................but Stoicism can help people to lead a
good life.
® It teaches people that having a strong character is more important than
anything else.
■4|@ p. 121 |0 p. 101	15
Test 1
READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading
Passage 1 below.
Why we need to protect polar bears
Polar bears are being increasingly threatened by the effects of climate change, but their disappearance
could have far-reaching consequences. They are uniquely adapted to the extreme conditions of
the Arctic Circle, where temperatures can reach -40°C. One reason for this is that they have up to
11 centimetres of fat underneath their skin. Humans with comparative levels of adipose tissue would
be considered obese and would be likely to suffer from diabetes and heart disease. Yet the polar bear
experiences no such consequences.
A 2014 study by Shi Ping Liu and colleagues sheds light on this mystery. They compared the genetic
structure of polar bears with that of their closest relatives from a wanner climate, the brown bears.
This allowed them to determine the genes that have allowed polar bears to survive in one of the
toughest environments on Earth. Liu and his colleagues found the polar bears had a gene known as
APoB, which reduces levels of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) - a form of ‘bad’ cholesterol. In
humans, mutations of this gene are associated with increased risk of heart disease. Polar bears may
therefore be an important study model to understand heart disease in humans.
The genome of the polar bear may also provide the solution for another condition, one that particularly
affects our older generation: osteoporosis. This is a disease where bones show reduced density, usually
caused by insufficient exercise, reduced calcium intake or food starvation. Bone tissue is constantly
being remodelled, meaning that bone is added or removed, depending on nutrient availability and the
stress that the bone is under. Female polar bears, however, undergo extr eme conditions during every
pregnancy. Once autumn comes around, these females will dig maternity dens in the snow and will
remain there throughout the winter, both before and after the birth of their cubs. This process results
in about six months of fasting, where the female bears have to keep themselves and their cubs alive,
depleting their own calcium and calorie reserves. Despite this, their bones remain strong and dense.
Physiologists Alanda Lennox and Allen Goodship found an explanation for this paradox in 2008.
They discovered that pregnant bears were able to increase the density of their bones before they
started to build their dens. In addition, six months later, when they finally emerged from the den with
their cubs, there was no evidence of significant loss of bone density. Hibernating brown bears do not
have this capacity and must therefore resort to major bone reformation in the following spring. If the
mechanism of bone remodelling in polar bears can be understood, many bedridden humans, and even
astronauts, could potentially benefit.
16
Reading
The medical benefits of the polar bear for humanity certainly have then importance in our
conservation efforts, but these should not be the only factors taken into consideration. We tend to
want to protect animals we think are intelligent and possess emotions, such as elephants and primates.
Bears, on the other hand, seem to be perceived as stupid and in many cases violent. And yet anecdotal
evidence from the field challenges those assumptions, suggesting for example that polar bears have
good problem-solving abilities. A male bear called GoGo in Tennoji Zoo, Osaka, has even been
observed making use of a tool to manipulate his environment. The bear used a tr ee branch on multiple
occasions to dislodge a piece of meat hung out of his reach. Problem-solving ability has also been
witnessed in wild polar bears, although not as obviously as with GoGo. A calculated move by a male
bear involved running and jumping onto barrels in an attempt to get to a photographer standing on a
platform four metres high.
In other studies, such as one by Alison Ames in 2008, polar bears showed deliberate and focussed
manipulation. For example, Ames observed bears putting objects in piles and then knocking them over
in what appeared to be a game. The study demonstrates that bears are capable of agile and thought-out
behaviours. These examples suggest bears have greater creativity and problem-solving abilities than
previously thought.
As for emotions, while the evidence is once again anecdotal, many bears have been seen to hit out
at ice and snow - seemingly out of frustration - when they have just missed out on a kill. Moreover,
polar bears can form unusual relationships with other species, including playing with the dogs used
to pull sleds in the Arctic. Remarkably, one hand-raised polar bear called Agee has formed a close
relationship with her owner Mark Dumas to the point where they even swim together. This is even
more astonishing since polar bears are known to actively hunt humans in the wild.
If climate change were to lead to their extinction, this would mean not only the loss of potential
breakthroughs in human medicine, but more importantly, the disappearance of an intelligent,
majestic animal.
17
Test 1
Questions 1-7
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1	Polar bears suffer from various health problems due to the build-up of fat under
their skin.
2	The study done by Liu and his colleagues compared different groups of polar bears.
3	Liu and colleagues were the first researchers to compare polar bears and brown
bears genetically.
4	Polar bears are able to control their levels of ‘bad’ cholesterol by genetic means.
5	Female polar bears are able to survive for about six months without food.
6	It was found that the bones of female polar bears were very weak when they came
out of their dens in spring.
7	The polar bear’s mechanism for increasing bone density could also be used by
people one day.
18
Reading
Questions 8-13
Complete the table below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.
Reasons why polar bears should be protected
People think of bears as unintelligent and 8.................
However, this may not be correct. For example:
•	In Tennoji Zoo, a bear has been seen using a branch as a 9................
This allowed him to knock down some 10.................
•	A wild polar bear worked out a method of reaching a platform where a
11................was located.
•	Polar bears have displayed behaviour such as conscious manipulation of
objects and activity similar to a 12.................
Bears may also display emotions. For example:
•	They may make movements suggesting 13................if disappointed
when hunting.
•	They may form relationships with other species.
 p. 122
19
Test 1
READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 on pages 21 and 22.
Questions 14-20
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings
i	The areas and artefacts within the pyramid itself
ii	A difficult task for those involved
iii	A king who saved his people
iv	A single certainty among other less definite facts
v	An overview of the external buildings and areas
vi	A pyramid design that others copied
vii	An idea for changing the design of burial structures
viii	An incredible experience despite the few remains
ix	The answers to some unexpected questions
14	Paragraph A
15	Paragraph B
16	Paragraph C
17	Paragraph D
18	Paragraph E
19	Paragraph F
20	Paragraph G
20
Reading
The Step Pyramid of Djoser
A The pyramids are the most famous monuments of ancient Egypt and still hold
enormous interest for people in the present day These grand, impressive tributes to
the memory of the Egyptian kings have become linked with the country even though
other cultures, such as the Chinese and Mayan, also built pyramids. The evolution of
the pyramid form has been written and argued about for centuries. However, there
is no question that, as far as Egypt is concerned, it began with one monument to one
king designed by one brilliant architect: the Step Pyramid of Djoser at Saqqara.
B Djoser was the first king of the Third Dynasty of Egypt and the first to build in
stone. Prior to Djoser’s reign, tombs were rectangular monuments made of dried clay
brick, which covered underground passages where the deceased person was buried.
For reasons which remain unclear, Djoser’s main official, whose name was Imhotep,
conceived of building a taller, more impressive tomb for his king by stacking stone
slabs on top of one another, progressively making them smaller, to form the shape
now known as the Step Pyramid. Djoser is thought to have reigned for 19 years, but
some historians and scholars attribute a much longer time for his rule, owing to the
number and size of the monuments he built.
C The Step Pyramid has been thoroughly examined and investigated over the
last century, and it is now known that the building process went through many
different stages. Historian Marc Van de Mieroop comments on this, writing ‘Much
experimentation was involved, which is especially clear in the construction of the
pyramid in the center of the complex. It had several plans ... before it became the
first Step Pyramid in history, piling six levels on top of one another ... The weight
of the enormous mass was a challenge for the builders, who placed the stones at an
inward incline in order to prevent the monument breaking up.’
D When finally completed, the Step Pyramid rose 62 meters high and was the tallest
structure of its time. The complex in which it was built was the size of a city in
ancient Egypt and included a temple, courtyards, shrines, and living quarters for the
priests. It covered a region of 16 hectares and was surrounded by a wall 10.5 meters
high. The wall had 13 false doors cut into it with only one true entrance cut into the
south-east corner; the entire wall was then ringed by a trench 750 meters long and
40 meters wide. The false doors and the trench were incorporated into the complex
to discourage unwanted visitors. If someone wished to enter, he or she would have
needed to know in advance how to find the location of the true opening in the wall.
Djoser was so proud of his accomplishment that he broke the tradition of having
only his own name on the monument and had Imhotep’s name carved on it as well.
21
Test 1
E The burial chamber of the tomb, where the king’s body was laid to rest, was dug
beneath the base of the pyramid, surrounded by a vast maze of long tunnels that
had rooms off them to discourage robbers. One of the most mysterious discoveries
found inside the pyramid was a large number of stone vessels. Over 40,000 of
these vessels, of various forms and shapes, were discovered in storerooms off the
pyramid’s underground passages. They are inscribed with the names of rulers from
the First and Second Dynasties of Egypt and made from different kinds of stone.
There is no agreement among scholars and archaeologists on why the vessels
were placed in the tomb of Djoser or what they were supposed to represent. The
archaeologist Jean-Philippe Lauer, who excavated most of the pyramid and complex,
believes they were originally stored and then given a ‘proper burial’ by Djoser in his
pyramid to honor his predecessors. There are other historians, however, who claim
the vessels were dumped into the shafts as yet another attempt to prevent grave
robbers from getting to the king’s burial chamber.
F Unfortunately, all of the precautions and intricate design of the underground network
did not prevent ancient robbers from finding a way in. Djoser’s grave goods, and
even his body, were stolen at some point in the past and all archaeologists found
were a small number of his valuables overlooked by the thieves. There was enough
left throughout the pyramid and its complex, however, to astonish and amaze the
archaeologists who excavated it.
G Egyptologist Miroslav Verner writes, ‘Few monuments hold a place in human
history as significant as that of the Step Pyramid in Saqqara ... It can be said
without exaggeration that this pyramid complex constitutes a milestone in the
evolution of monumental stone architecture in Egypt and in the world as a whole.’
The Step Pyramid was a revolutionary advance in architecture and became the
archetype which all the other great pyramid builders of Egypt would follow.
22
Reading
Questions 21-24
Complete the notes below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 21-24 on your answer sheet.
The Step Pyramid of Djoser
The complex that includes the Step Pyramid and its surroundings is considered to be
as big as an Egyptian 21..............of the past. The area outside the pyramid
included accommodation that was occupied by 22.............., along with
many other buildings and features.
A wall ran around the outside of the complex and a number of false entrances were
built into this. In addition, a long 23..............encircled the wall. As a result,
any visitors who had not been invited were cleverly prevented from entering the
pyramid grounds unless they knew the 24..............of the real entrance.
Questions 25-26
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Write the correct letters in boxes 25 and 26 on your answer sheet.
Which TWO of the following points does the writer make about King Djoser?
A Initially he had to be persuaded to build in stone rather than clay.
B	There is disagreement concerning the length of his reign.
C	He failed to appreciate Imhotep’s part in the design of the Step Pyramid.
D A few of his possessions were still in his tomb when archaeologists found it.
E He criticised the design and construction of other pyramids in Egypt.
O p. 122
23
Test 1
READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 below.
The future of work
According to a leading business consultancy, 3-14% of the global workforce will need to switch
to a different occupation within the next 10-15 years, and all workers will need to adapt as
their occupations evolve alongside increasingly capable machines. Automation - or ‘embodied
artificial intelligence’ (Al) - is one aspect of the disruptive effects of technology on the labour
market. ‘Disembodied Al’, like the algorithms running in our smartphones, is another.
Dr Stella Pachidi from Cambridge Judge Business School believes that some of the most
fundamental changes are happening as a result of the ‘algorithmication’ of jobs that are dependent
on data rather than on production - the so-called knowledge economy. Algorithms are capable of
learning from data to undertake tasks that previously needed human judgement, such as reading
legal contracts, analysing medical scans and gathering market intelligence.
‘In many cases, they can outperform humans,’ says Pachidi. ‘Organisations are attracted to
using algorithms because they want to make choices based on what they consider is “perfect
information”, as well as to reduce costs and enhance productivity.’
‘But these enhancements are not without consequences,’ says Pachidi. ‘If routine cognitive tasks
are taken over by Al, how do professions develop their future experts?’ she asks. ‘One way of
learning about a job is “legitimate peripheral participation” - a novice stands next to experts and
learns by observation. If this isn’t happening, then you need to find new ways to learn.’
Another issue is the extent to which the technology influences or even controls the workforce.
For over two years, Pachidi monitored a telecommunications company. ‘The way telecoms
salespeople work is through personal and frequent contact with clients, using the benefit of
experience to assess a situation and reach a decision. However, the company had started using
a[n] ... algorithm that defined when account managers should contact certain customers about
which kinds of campaigns and what to offer them.’
The algorithm - usually built by external designers - often becomes the keeper of knowledge,
she explains. In cases like this, Pachidi believes, a short-sighted view begins to creep into
working practices whereby workers learn through the ‘algorithm’s eyes’ and become dependent
on its instructions. Alternative explorations - where experimentation and human instinct lead to
progress and new ideas - are effectively discouraged.
Pachidi and colleagues even observed people developing strategies to make the algorithm work
to their own advantage. ‘We are seeing cases where workers feed the algorithm with false data to
reach their targets,’ she reports.
24
Reading
It’s scenarios like these that many researchers are working to avoid. Their objective is to make Al
technologies more trustworthy and transparent, so that organisations and individuals understand
how Al decisions are made. In the meantime, says Pachidi, ‘We need to make sure we fully
understand the dilemmas that this new world raises regarding expertise, occupational boundaries
and control.’
Economist Professor Hamish Low believes that the future of work will involve major transitions
across the whole life course for everyone: ‘The traditional trajectory of full-time education
followed by full-time work followed by a pensioned retirement is a thing of the past,’ says Low.
Instead, he envisages a multistage employment life: one where retraining happens across the life
course, and where multiple jobs and no job happen by choice at different stages.
On the subject of job losses, Low believes the predictions are founded on a fallacy: ‘It assumes
that the number of jobs is fixed. If in 30 years, half of 100 jobs are being carried out by robots,
that doesn’t mean we are left with just 50 jobs for humans. The number of jobs will increase: we
would expect there to be 150 jobs.’
Dr Ewan McGaughey, at Cambridge’s Centre for Business Research and King’s College London,
agrees that ‘apocalyptic’ views about the future of work are misguided. ‘It’s the laws that
restrict the supply of capital to the job market, not the advent of new technologies that causes
unemployment.’
His recently published research answers the question of whether automation, Al and robotics will
mean a ‘jobless future’ by looking at the causes of unemployment. ‘History is clear that change
can mean redundancies. But social policies can tackle this through retraining and redeployment.’
He adds: ‘If there is going to be change to jobs as a result of Al and robotics then I’d like to see
governments seizing the opportunity to improve policy to enforce good job security. We can
“reprogramme” the law to prepare for a fairer future of work and leisure.’ McGaughey’s findings
are a call to arms to leaders of organisations, governments and banks to pre-empt the coming
changes with bold new policies that guarantee full employment, fair incomes and a thriving
economic democracy.
‘The promises of these new technologies are astounding. They deliver humankind the capacity
to live in a way that nobody could have once imagined,’ he adds. ‘Just as the industrial revolution
brought people past subsistence agriculture, and the corporate revolution enabled mass
production, a third revolution has been pronounced. But it will not only be one of technology. The
next revolution will be social.’
25
Test 1
Questions 27-30
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet.
27	The first paragraph tells us about
A the kinds of jobs that will be most affected by the growth of Al.
B the extent to which Al will alter the nature of the work that people do.
C the proportion of the world’s labour force who will have jobs in Al in the future.
D the difference between ways that embodied and disembodied Al will impact
on workers.
28	According to the second paragraph, what is Stella Pachidi’s view of the ‘knowledge
economy’?
A It is having an influence on the number of jobs available.
B	It is changing people’s attitudes towards their occupations.
C	It is the main reason why the production sector is declining.
D It is a key factor driving current developments in the workplace.
29	What did Pachidi observe at the telecommunications company?
A staff disagreeing with the recommendations of Al
B staff feeling resentful about the intrusion of Al in their work
C	staff making sure that Al produces the results that they want
D	staff allowing Al to carry out tasks they ought to do themselves
30	In his recently published research, Ewan McGaughey
A challenges the idea that redundancy is a negative thing.
B shows the profound effect of mass unemployment on society.
C highlights some differences between past and future job losses.
D illustrates how changes in the job market can be successfully handled.
26
Reading
Questions 31-34
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-G, below.
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 31-34 on your answer sheet.
The ‘algorithmication’ of jobs
Stella Pachidi of Cambridge Judge Business School has been focusing on the
‘algorithmication’ of jobs which rely not on production but on 31................
While monitoring a telecommunications company, Pachidi observed a growing
32...............on the recommendations made by Al, as workers begin to learn
through the ‘algorithm’s eyes’. Meanwhile, staff are deterred from experimenting and using
their own 33...............__ and are therefore prevented from achieving innovation.
To avoid the kind of situations which Pachidi observed, researchers are trying to
make Al’s decision-making process easier to comprehend, and to increase users’
34................with regard to the technology.
A	pressure	B	satisfaction	C	intuition
D	promotion	E	reliance	F	confidence
G	information				
27
Test 1
Questions 35-40
Look at the following statements (Questions 35-40) and the list of people below.
Match each statement with the correct person, A, B or C.
Write the correct letter, A, B or C, in boxes 35-40 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
35	Greater levels of automation will not result in lower employment.
36	There are several reasons why Al is appealing to businesses.
37	Al’s potential to transform people’s lives has parallels with major cultural shifts
which occurred in previous eras.
38	It is important to be aware of the range of problems that Al causes.
39	People are going to follow a less conventional career path than in the past.
40	Authorities should take measures to ensure that there will be adequately paid work
for everyone.
List of people
A	Stella Pachidi
B	Hamish Low
C Ewan McGaughey
28
-> O p. 122
WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The charts below show the changes in ownership of electrical appliances and
amount of time spent doing housework in households in one country between
1920 and 2019.
Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and
make comparisons where relevant.
Write at least 150 words.
Percentage of households with electrical appliances
(1920-2019)
Number of hours of housework* per week,
per household (1920-2019)
-©- Hours per week
•housework = washing clothes, preparing meals, cleaning
p. 129
29
Test 1
WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
In some countries, more and more people are becoming interested in finding
out about the history of the house or building they live in.
What are the reasons for this?
How can people research this?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own
knowledge or experience.
Write at least 250 words.
30
->^p. 131
SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks you about yourself, your home, work or studies and other familiar
topics.
EXAMPLE
People you study/work with
•	Who do you spend most time studying/working with? [Why?]
® What kinds of things do you study/work on with other people? [Why?]
•	Are there times when you study/work better by yourself? [Why/Why not?]
« Is it important to like the people you study/work with? [Why/Why not?]
PART 2
Describe a tourist attraction you enjoyed visiting.
You should say:
what this tourist attraction is
when and why you visited it
what you did there
and explain why you enjoyed visiting this tourist
attraction.
You will have to talk
about the topic for one
to two minutes. You
have one minute to
think about what you
are going to say. You
can make some notes
to help you if you wish.
PART 3
Discussion topics:
Different kinds of tourist attractions
Example questions:
What are the most popular tourist attractions in your country?
How do the types of tourist attractions that younger people like to visit compare with
those that older people like to visit?
Do you agree that some tourist attractions (e.g. national museums/galleries) should be
free to visit?
The importance of international tourism
Example questions:
Why is tourism important to a country?
What are the benefits to individuals of visiting another country as tourists?
How necessary is it for tourists to learn the language of the country they’re visiting?
31
Test 2
LISTENING
PART 1 Questions 1-10
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ANDIOR A NUMBER for each answer.
Copying photos to digital format
Name of company: Picturerep
Requirements
•	Maximum size of photos is 30 cm, minimum size 4 cm.
© Photos must not be in a 1................or an album.
Cost
•	The cost for 360 photos is 2 £................(including one disk).
a Before the completed order is sent, 3................is required.
Services included in the price
« Photos can be placed in a folder, e.g. with the name 4...............
® The 5................and contrast can be improved if necessary.
® Photos which are very fragile will be scanned by 6................
Special restore service (costs extra)
•	It may be possible to remove an object from a photo, or change the
7................
•	A photo which is not correctly in 8................cannot be fixed.
Other information
® Orders are completed within 9................
•	Send the photos in a box (not 10................).
32	-> P p. 123 B p. 104
Listening
PART 2 Questions 11-20
Questions 11-15
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.
11	Dartfield House school used to be
A a tourist information centre.
B a private home.
C a local council building.
12	What is planned with regard to the lower school?
A All buildings on the main site will be improved.
B The lower school site will be used for new homes.
C Additional school buildings will be constructed on the lower school site.
13	The catering has been changed because of
A long queuing times.
B changes to the school timetable.
C dissatisfaction with the menus.
14	Parents are asked to
A help their children to decide in advance which serving point to use.
B make sure their children have enough money for food.
C advise their children on healthy food to eat.
15	What does the speaker say about the existing canteen?
A Food will still be served there.
B Only staff will have access to it.
C Pupils can take their food into it.
33
Test 2
Questions 16-18
What comment does the speaker make about each of the following serving points in the
Food Hall?
Choose THREE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-D, next to
Questions 16-18.
Comments
A pupils help to plan menus
B only vegetarian food
C	different food every week
D	daily change in menu
Food available	at serving points in Food Hall
16	World Adventures	.........
17	Street Life	.........
18	Speedy Italian	.........
Questions 19 and 20
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO optional after-school lessons are new?
A swimming
B piano
C acting
D cycling
E theatre sound and lighting
34	-> B p. 123 U p. 105
Listening
PART 3 Questions 21-30
Questions 21-24
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.
Assignment on sleep and dreams
21	Luke read that one reason why we often forget dreams is that
A our memories cannot cope with too much information.
B we might otherwise be confused about what is real.
C we do not think they are important.
22	What do Luke and Susie agree about dreams predicting the future?
A It may just be due to chance.
B It only happens with certain types of event.
C It happens more often than some people think.
23	Susie says that a study on pre-school children having a short nap in the day
A had controversial results.
B used faulty research methodology.
C failed to reach any clear conclusions.
24	In their last assignment, both students had problems with
A statistical analysis.
B making an action plan.
C self-assessment.
35
Test 2
Questions 25-30
Complete the flow chart below.
Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.
Assignment plan
Listening
PART 4 Questions 31-40
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.
Health benefits of dance
Recent findings:
9 All forms of dance produce various hormones associated with feelings of
happiness.
® Dancing with others has a more positive impact than dancing alone.
•	An experiment on university students suggested that dance
increases 31................
•	For those with mental illness, dance could be used as a form of
32................
Benefits of dance for older people:
« accessible for people with low levels of 33...............
® reduces the risk of heart disease
® better 34...............reduces the risk of accidents
® improves 35...............function by making it work faster
•	improves participants’ general well-being
•	gives people more 36...............to take exercise
•	can lessen the feeling of 37................very common in older people
Benefits of Zumba:
•	A study at The University of Wisconsin showed that doing Zumba for
40 minutes uses up as many 38...............as other quite intense forms
of exercise.
•	The American Journal of Health Behavior study showed that:
-	women suffering from 39...............benefited from doing Zumba.
-	Zumba became a 40...............for the participants.
-> 0 p. 123 g p. 107
37
Test 2
READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading
Passage 1 below.
The White Horse of Uffington
The cutting of huge figures or ‘geoglyphs’ into the earth of English hillsides has taken
place for more than 3,000 years. There are 56 hill figures scattered around England, with
the vast majority on the chalk downlands of the country’s southern counties. The figures
include giants, horses, crosses and regimental badges. Although the majority of these
geoglyphs date within the last 300 years or so, there are one or two that are much older.
The most famous of these figures is perhaps also the most mysterious - the Uffington
White Horse in Oxfordshire. The White Horse has recently been re-dated and shown
to be even older than its previously assigned ancient pre-Roman Iron Age* date. More
controversial is the date of the enigmatic Long Man of Wilmington in Sussex. While many
historians are convinced the figure is prehistoric, others believe that it was the work of an
artistic monk from a nearby priory and was created between the 11th and 15th centuries.
The method of cutting these huge figures was simply to remove the overlying grass
to reveal the gleaming white chalk below. However, the grass would soon grow over
the geoglyph again unless it was regularly cleaned or scoured by a fairly large team
of people. One reason that the vast majority of hill figures have disappeared is that
when the traditions associated with the figures faded, people no longer bothered or
remembered to clear away the grass to expose the chalk outline. Furthermore, over
hundreds of years the outlines would sometimes change due to people not always
cutting in exactly the same place, thus creating a different shape to the original
geoglyph. The fact that any ancient hill figures survive at all in England today is
testament to the strength and continuity of local customs and beliefs which, in one case
at least, must stretch back over millennia.
‘Iron Age: a period (in Britain 800 BCE - 43 CE) that is characterised by the use of iron tools
38
Reading
The Uffington White Horse is a unique, stylised representation of a horse consisting of
a long, sleek back, thin disjointed legs, a streaming tail, and a bird-like beaked head.
The elegant creature almost melts into the landscape. The horse is situated 2.5 km from
Uffington village on a steep slope close to the Late Bronze Age* (c. 7th century BCE)
hillfort of Uffington Castle and below the Ridgeway, a long-distance Neolithic** track.
The Uffington Horse is also surrounded by Bronze Age burial mounds. It is not far from
the Bronze Age cemetery of Lambourn Seven Barrows, which consists of more than 30
well-preserved burial mounds. The carving has been placed in such a way as to make it
extremely difficult to see from close quarters, and like many geoglyphs is best appreciated
from the air. Nevertheless, there are certain areas of the Vale of the White Horse, the valley
containing and named after the enigmatic creature, from which an adequate impression
may be gained. Indeed on a clear day the carving can be seen from up to 30 km away.
The earliest evidence of a horse at Uffington is from the 1070s CE when ‘White Horse
Hill’ is mentioned in documents from the nearby Abbey of Abingdon, and the first
reference to the horse itself is soon after, in 1190 CE. However, the carving is believed
to date back much further than that. Due to the similarity of the Uffington White Horse to
the stylised depictions of horses on 1st century BCE coins, it had been thought that the
creature must also date to that period.
However, in 1995 Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) testing was carried out by
the Oxford Archaeological Unit on soil from two of the lower layers of the horse’s body,
and from another cut near the base. The result was a date for the horse’s construction
somewhere between 1400 and 600 BCE - in other words, it had a Late Bronze Age or
Early Iron Age origin.
The latter end of this date range would tie the carving of the horse in with occupation of the
nearby Uffington hillfort, indicating that it may represent a tribal emblem marking the land of
the inhabitants of the hillfort. Alternatively, the carving may have been carried out during a
Bronze or Iron Age ritual. Some researchers see the horse as representing the Celtic*** horse
goddess Epona, who was worshipped as a protector of horses, and for her associations with
fertility. However, the cult of Epona was not imported from Gaul (France) until around the first
century CE. This date is at least six centuries after the Uffington Horse was probably carved.
Nevertheless, the horse had great ritual and economic significance during the Bronze and
Iron Ages, as attested by its depictions on jewellery and other metal objects. It is possible that
the carving represents a goddess in native mythology, such as Rhiannon, described in later
Welsh mythology as a beautiful woman dressed in gold and riding a white horse.
The fact that geoglyphs can disappear easily, along with their associated rituals and meaning,
indicates that they were never intended to be anything more than temporary gestures. But
this does not lessen their importance. These giant carvings are a fascinating glimpse into the
minds of their creators and how they viewed the landscape in which they lived.
•Bronze Age: a period (in Britain c. 2,500 BCE - 800 BCE) that is characterised by the development of bronze tools
"Neolithic: a period (in Britain c. 4,000 BCE - c. 2,500 BCE) that is significant for the spread of agricultural practices, and the use of
stone tools
•"Celtic: an ancient people who migrated from Europe to Britain before the Romans
39
Test 2
Questions 1-8
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1	Most geoglyphs in England are located in a particular area of the country.
2	There are more geoglyphs in the shape of a horse than any other creature.
3	A recent dating of the Uffington White Horse indicates that people were mistaken
about its age.
4	Historians have come to an agreement about the origins of the Long Man of
Wilmington.
5	Geoglyphs were created by people placing white chalk on the hillside.
6	Many geoglyphs in England are no longer visible.
7	The shape of some geoglyphs has been altered over time.
8	The fame of the Uffington White Horse is due to its size.
40
Reading
Questions 9-13
Complete the notes below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.
The Uffington White Horse
The location of the Uffington White Horse:
•	a distance of 2.5 km from Uffington village
•	near an ancient road known as the 9................
® close to an ancient cemetery that has a number of burial mounds
Dating the Uffington White Horse:
® first reference to White Horse Hill appears in 10................from
the 1070s
•	horses shown on coins from the period 100 BCE - 1 BCE are similar in
appearance
o according to analysis of the surrounding 11................, the Horse is
Late Bronze Age / Early Iron Age
Possible reasons for creation of the Uffington White Horse:
•	an emblem to indicate land ownership
•	formed part of an ancient ritual
•	was a representation of goddess Epona - associated with protection of horses
and 12................
® was a representation of a Welsh goddess called 13................
-> 0 p. 124
41
Test 2
READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 below.
I contain multitudes
Wendy Moore reviews Ed Yong’s book about microbes
Microbes, most of them bacteria, have populated this planet since long before animal life
developed and they will outlive us. Invisible to the naked eye, they are ubiquitous. They inhabit
the soil, air, rocks and water and are present within every form of life, from seaweed and coral to
dogs and humans. And, as Yong explains in his utterly absorbing and hugely important book, we
mess with them at our peril.
Every species has its own colony of microbes, called a ‘microbiome’, and these microbes
vary not only between species but also between individuals and within different parts of each
individual. What is amazing is that while the number of human cells in the average person is
about 30 trillion, the number of microbial ones is higher - about 39 trillion. At best, Yong informs
us, we are only 50 per cent human. Indeed, some scientists even suggest we should think of each
species and its microbes as a single unit, dubbed a ‘holobiont’.
In each human there are microbes that live only in the stomach, the mouth or the armpit and by
and large they do so peacefully. So ‘bad’ microbes are just microbes out of context. Microbes
that sit contentedly in the human gut (where there are more microbes than there are stars in
the galaxy) can become deadly if they find their way into the bloodstream. These communities
are constantly changing too. The right hand shares just one sixth of its microbes with the left
hand. And, of course, we are surrounded by microbes. Every time we eat, we swallow a million
microbes in each gram of food; we are continually swapping microbes with other humans, pets
and the world at large.
It’s a fascinating topic and Yong, a young British science journalist, is an extraordinarily adept
guide. Writing with lightness and panache, he has a knack of explaining complex science in terms
that are both easy to understand and totally enthralling. Yong is on a mission. Leading us gently
by the hand, he takes us into the world of microbes - a bizarre, alien planet - in a bid to persuade
us to love them as much as he does. By the end, we do.
For most of human history we had no idea that microbes existed. The first man to see these
extraordinarily potent creatures was a Dutch lens-maker called Antony van Leeuwenhoek in the
1670s. Using microscopes of his own design that could magnify up to 270 times, he examined a
drop of water from a nearby lake and found it teeming with tiny creatures he called ‘animalcules’.
It wasn’t until nearly two hundred years later that the research of French biologist Louis Pasteur
indicated that some microbes caused disease. It was Pasteur’s ‘germ theory’ that gave bacteria the
poor image that endures today.
42
Reading
Yong’s book is in many ways a plea for microbial tolerance, pointing out that while fewer
than one hundred species of bacteria bring disease, many thousands more play a vital role in
maintaining our health. The book also acknowledges that our attitude towards bacteria is not
a simple one. We tend to see the dangers posed by bacteria, yet at the same time we are sold
yoghurts and drinks that supposedly nurture ‘friendly’ bacteria. In reality, says Yong, bacteria
should not be viewed as either friends or foes, villains or heroes. Instead we should realise we
have a symbiotic relationship, that can be mutually beneficial or mutually destructive.
What then do these millions of organisms do? The answer is pretty much everything. New
research is now unravelling the ways in which bacteria aid digestion, regulate our immune
systems, eliminate toxins, produce vitamins, affect our behaviour and even combat obesity.
‘They actually help us become who we are,’ says Yong. But we are facing a growing problem.
Our obsession with hygiene, our overuse of antibiotics and our unhealthy, low-fibre diets are
disrupting the bacterial balance and may be responsible for soaring rates of allergies and immune
problems, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
The most recent research actually turns accepted norms upside down. For example, there are
studies indicating that the excessive use of household detergents and antibacterial products
actually destroys the microbes that normally keep the more dangerous germs at bay. Other studies
show that keeping a dog as a pet gives children early exposure to a diverse range of bacteria,
which may help protect them against allergies later.
The readers of Yong’s book must be prepared for a decidedly unglamorous world. Among the less
appealing case studies is one about a fungus that is wiping out entire populations of frogs and
that can be halted by a rare microbial bacterium. Another is about squid that carry luminescent
bacteria that protect them against predators. However, if you can overcome your distaste for some
of the investigations, the reasons for Yong’s enthusiasm become clear. The microbial world is a
place of wonder. Already, in an attempt to stop mosquitoes spreading dengue fever - a disease
that infects 400 million people a year - mosquitoes are being loaded with a bacterium to block
the disease. In the future, our ability to manipulate microbes means we could construct buildings
with useful microbes built into their walls to fight off infections. Just imagine a neonatal hospital
ward coated in a specially mixed cocktail of microbes so that babies get the best start in life.
43
Test 2
Questions 14-16
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter in boxes 14-16 on your answer sheet.
14	What point does the writer make about microbes in the first paragraph?
A They adapt quickly to their environment.
B The risk they pose has been exaggerated.
C	They are more plentiful in animal life than plant life.
D	They will continue to exist for longer than the human race.
15	In the second paragraph, the writer is impressed by the fact that
A each species tends to have vastly different microbes.
B some parts of the body contain relatively few microbes.
C the average individual has more microbial cells than human ones.
D scientists have limited understanding of how microbial cells behave.
16	What is the writer doing in the fifth paragraph?
A explaining how a discovery was made
B	comparing scientists’ theories about microbes
C	describing confusion among scientists
D giving details of how microbes cause disease
44
Reading
Questions 17-20
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-H, below.
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 17-20 on your answer sheet.
We should be more tolerant of microbes
Yong’s book argues that we should be more tolerant of microbes. Many have a
beneficial effect, and only a relatively small number lead to 17.................And
although it is misleading to think of microbes as ‘friendly’, we should also stop thinking of
them as the enemy. In fact, we should accept that our relationship with microbes is one
based on 18.................
New research shows that microbes have numerous benefits for humans. Amongst other
things, they aid digestion, remove poisons, produce vitamins and may even help reduce
obesity. However, there is a growing problem. Our poor 19...................., our
overuse of antibiotics, and our excessive focus on 20....................are upsetting the
bacterial balance and may be contributing to the huge increase in allergies and immune
system problems.
A	solution	B	partnership	C	destruction
D	exaggeration	E	cleanliness	F	regulations
G	illness	H	nutrition		
45
Test 2
Questions 21-26
Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 21-26 on your answer sheet, write
YES if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO	if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
21	It is possible that using antibacterial products in the home fails to have the desired
effect.
22	It is a good idea to ensure that children come into contact with as few bacteria as
possible.
23	Yong’s book contains more case studies than are necessary.
24	The case study about bacteria that prevent squid from being attacked may have
limited appeal.
25	Efforts to control dengue fever have been surprisingly successful.
26	Microbes that reduce the risk of infection have already been put inside the walls of
some hospital wards.
46	-»
O p. 124
Reading
READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 below.
How to make wise decisions
Across cultures, wisdom has been considered one of the most revered human qualities. Although
the truly wise may seem few and far between, empirical research examining wisdom suggests
that it isn’t an exceptional trait possessed by a small handful of bearded philosophers after all - in
fact, the latest studies suggest that most of us have the ability to make wise decisions, given the
right context.
‘It appears that experiential, situational, and cultural factors are even more powerful in shaping
wisdom than previously imagined,’ says Associate Professor Igor Grossmann of the University
of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada. ‘Recent empirical findings from cognitive, developmental,
social, and personality psychology cumulatively suggest that people’s ability to reason wisely
varies dramatically across experiential and situational contexts. Understanding the role of such
contextual factors offers unique insights into understanding wisdom in daily life, as well as how it
can be enhanced and taught.’
It seems that it’s not so much that some people simply possess wisdom and others lack it, but
that our ability to reason wisely depends on a variety of external factors. ‘It is impossible to
characterize thought processes attributed to wisdom without considering the role of contextual
factors,’ explains Grossmann. ‘In other words, wisdom is not solely an “inner quality” but rather
unfolds as a function of situations people happen to be in. Some situations are more likely to
promote wisdom than others.’
Coming up with a definition of wisdom is challenging, but Grossmann and his colleagues have
identified four key characteristics as part of a framework of wise reasoning. One is intellectual
humility or recognition of the limits of our own knowledge, and another is appreciation of
perspectives wider than the issue at hand. Sensitivity to the possibility of change in social
relations is also key, along with compromise or integration of different attitudes and beliefs.
Grossmann and his colleagues have also found that one of the most reliable ways to support
wisdom in our own day-to-day decisions is to look at scenarios from a third-party perspective, as
though giving advice to a friend. Research suggests that when adopting a first-person viewpoint
we focus on ‘the focal features of the environment’ and when we adopt a third-person, ‘observer’
viewpoint we reason more broadly and focus more on interpersonal and moral ideals such as
justice and impartiality. Looking at problems from this more expansive viewpoint appears to
foster cognitive processes related to wise decisions.
47
Test 2
What are we to do, then, when confronted with situations like a disagreement with a spouse or
negotiating a contract at work, that require us to take a personal stake? Grossmann argues that
even when we aren’t able to change the situation, we can still evaluate these experiences from
different perspectives.
For example, in one experiment that took place during the peak of a recent economic recession,
graduating college seniors were asked to reflect on their job prospects. The students were
instructed to imagine their career either ‘as if you were a distant observer’ or ‘before your own
eyes as if you were right there’. Participants in the group assigned to the ‘distant observer’ role
displayed more wisdom-related reasoning (intellectual humility and recognition of change) than
did participants in the control group.
In another study, couples in long-term romantic relationships were instructed to visualize
an unresolved relationship conflict either through the eyes of an outsider or from their own
perspective. Participants then discussed the incident with their partner for 10 minutes, after which
they wrote down their thoughts about it. Couples in the ‘other’s eyes’ condition were significantly
more likely to rely on wise reasoning - recognizing others’ perspectives and searching for a
compromise - compared to the couples in the egocentric condition.
‘Ego-decentering promotes greater focus on others and enables a bigger picture, conceptual view
of the experience, affording recognition of intellectual humility and change,’ says Grossmann.
We might associate wisdom with intelligence or particular personality traits, but research shows
only a small positive relationship between wise thinking and crystallized intelligence and the
personality traits of openness and agreeableness. ‘It is remarkable how much people can vary in
their wisdom from one situation to the next, and how much stronger such contextual effects are
for understanding the relationship between wise judgment and its social and affective outcomes as
compared to the generalized “traits”,’ Grossmann explains. ‘That is, knowing how wisely a person
behaves in a given situation is more informative for understanding their emotions or likelihood to
forgive [or] retaliate as compared to knowing whether the person may be wise “in general”.’
48
Reading
Questions 27-30
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet.
27	What point does the writer make in the first paragraph?
A Wisdom appears to be unique to the human race.
B A basic assumption about wisdom may be wrong.
C Concepts of wisdom may depend on the society we belong to.
D There is still much to be discovered about the nature of wisdom.
28	What does Igor Grossmann suggest about the ability to make wise decisions?
A It can vary greatly from one person to another.
B Earlier research into it was based on unreliable data.
C The importance of certain influences on it was underestimated.
D Various branches of psychology define it according to their own criteria.
29	According to the third paragraph, Grossmann claims that the level of wisdom an
individual shows
A can be greater than they think it is.
B will be different in different circumstances.
C may be determined by particular aspects of their personality.
D should develop over time as a result of their life experiences.
30	What is described in the fifth paragraph?
A a difficulty encountered when attempting to reason wisely
B an example of the type of person who is likely to reason wisely
C a controversial view about the benefits of reasoning wisely
D a recommended strategy that can help people to reason wisely
49
Test 2
Questions 31-35
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-J, below.
Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet.
The characteristics of wise reasoning
Igor Grossmann and colleagues have established four characteristics which enable us
to make wise decisions. It is important to have a certain degree of 31...............
regarding the extent of our knowledge, and to take into account 32...............
which may not be the same as our own. We should also be able to take a broad
33...............of any situation. Another key characteristic is being aware of the
likelihood of alterations in the way that people relate to each other.
Grossmann also believes that it is better to regard scenarios with 34..................
By avoiding the first-person perspective, we focus more on 35.................and on
other moral ideals, which in turn leads to wiser decision-making.
A	opinions	B	confidence	C	view
D	modesty	E	problems	F	objectivity
G	fairness	H	experiences	I	range
J	reasons				
50
Reading
Questions 36-40
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE	if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE	if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
36	Students participating in the job prospects experiment could choose one of two
perspectives to take.
37	Participants in the couples experiment were aware that they were taking part in a
study about wise reasoning.
38	In the couples experiments, the length of the couples’ relationships had an impact
on the results.
39	In both experiments, the participants who looked at the situation from a more
detached viewpoint tended to make wiser decisions.
40	Grossmann believes that a person’s wisdom is determined by their intelligence to
only a very limited extent.
-> O p. 124	51
WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The diagram below shows the manufacturing process for making sugar from
sugar cane.
Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and
make comparisons where relevant.
Write at least 150 words.
52
How sugar is produced from sugar cane
-> p. 133
Writing
WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
In their advertising, businesses nowadays usually emphasise that their products
are new in some way.
Why is this? Do you think it is a positive or negative development?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own
knowledge or experience.
Write at least 250 words.
p. 134
53
SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks you about yourself, your home, work or studies and other familiar
topics.
EXAMPLE
Flowers and plants
® Do you have a favourite flower or plant? [Why/Why not?]
•	What kinds of flowers and plants grow near where you live? [Why/Why not?]
® Is it important to you to have flowers and plants in your home? [Why/Why not?]
•	Have you ever bought flowers for someone else? [Why/Why not?]
PART 2
Describe a review you read about a product or
service.
You should say:
where you read the review
what the product or service was
what information the review gave about the
product or service
and explain what you did as a result of reading
this review.
You will have to talk
about the topic for one
to two minutes. You
have one minute to
think about what you
are going to say. You
can make some notes
to help you if you wish.
PART 3
Discussion topics:
Online reviews
Example questions:
What kinds of things do people write online reviews about in your country?
Why do some people write online reviews?
Do you think that online reviews are good for both shoppers and companies?
Customer service
Example questions:
What do you think it might be like to work in a customer service job?
Do you agree that customers are more likely to complain nowadays?
How important is it for companies to take all customer complaints seriously?
54
Test 3
LISTENING
PART 1 Questions 1-10
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ANDIOR A NUMBER for each answer.
JUNIOR CYCLE CAMP
The course focuses on skills and safety.
•	Charlie would be placed in Level 5.
•	First of all, children at this level are taken to practise in a 1..................
Instructors
•	Instructors wear 2.................shirts.
•	A3.................is required and training is given.
Classes
•	The size of the classes is limited.
•	There are quiet times during the morning for a 4.................or a game.
•	Classes are held even if there is 5..................
What to bring
•	a change of clothing
•	a 6.................
•	shoes (not sandals)
•	Charlie’s 7.................
Day 1
•	Charlie should arrive at 9.20 am on the first day.
•	Before the class, his 8...............will be checked.
•	He should then go to the 9.................to meet his class instructor.
Cost
•	The course costs 10 $.................per week.
O p. 125 I p. 110
55
Test 3
PART 2 Questions 11-20
Questions 11 and 12
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
According to Megan, what are the TWO main advantages of working in the agriculture
and horticulture sectors?
A	the active lifestyle
B	the above-average salaries
C	the flexible working opportunities
D	the opportunities for overseas travel
E the chance to be in a natural environment
Questions 13 and 14
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO of the following are likely to be disadvantages for people working outdoors?
A the increasing risk of accidents
B being in a very quiet location
C difficult weather conditions at times
D the cost of housing
E the level of physical fitness required
56
Listening
Questions 15-20
What information does Megan give about each of the following job opportunities?
Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-H, next to
Questions 15-20.
Information
A	not a permanent job
B	involves leading a team
C	experience not essential
D	intensive work but also fun
E	chance to earn more through overtime
F	chance for rapid promotion
G	accommodation available
H	local travel involved
Job opportunities
15	Fresh food commercial manager
16	Agronomist
17	Fresh produce buyer
18	Garden centre sales manager
19	Tree technician
20	Farm worker
->  p. 125 i p. 111	57
Test 3
PART 3 Questions 21-30
Questions 21 and 22
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO points does Adam make about his experiment on artificial sweeteners?
A The results were what he had predicted.
B The experiment was simple to set up.
C A large sample of people was tested.
D The subjects were unaware of what they were drinking.
E The test was repeated several times for each person.
Questions 23 and 24
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO problems did Rosie have when measuring the fat content of nuts?
A She used the wrong sort of nuts.
B She used an unsuitable chemical.
C She did not grind the nuts finely enough.
D The information on the nut package was incorrect.
E The weighing scales may have been unsuitable.
58
Listening
Questions 25-30
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.
25	Adam suggests that restaurants could reduce obesity if their menus
A offered fewer options.
B had more low-calorie foods.
C were organised in a particular way.
26	The students agree that food manufacturers deliberately
A make calorie counts hard to understand.
B fail to provide accurate calorie counts.
C use ineffective methods to reduce calories.
27	What does Rosie say about levels of exercise in England?
A The amount recommended is much too low.
B Most people overestimate how much they do.
C Women now exercise more than they used to.
28	Adam refers to the location and width of stairs in a train station to illustrate
A practical changes that can influence people’s behaviour.
B methods of helping people who have mobility problems.
C ways of preventing accidents by controlling crowd movement.
29	What do the students agree about including reference to exercise in their
presentation?
A They should probably leave it out.
B They need to do more research on it.
C They should discuss this with their tutor.
30	What are the students going to do next for their presentation?
A prepare some slides for it
B find out how long they have for it
C decide on its content and organisation
.125 Ho. 112	59
Test 3
PART 4 Questions 31-40
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.
Hand knitting
Interest in knitting
• Knitting has a long history around the world.
o We imagine someone like a 31.................knitting.
© A 32.................ago, knitting was expected to disappear.
e The number of knitting classes is now increasing.
® People are buying more 33.................for knitting nowadays.
Benefits of knitting
© gives support in times of 34.................difficulty
e requires only 35.................skills and little money to start
« reduces stress in a busy life
Early knitting
© The origins are not known.
o Findings show early knitted items to be 36.................in shape.
0 The first needles were made of natural materials such as wood and
37..................
© Early yarns felt 38.................to touch.
© Wool became the most popular yarn for spinning.
e Geographical areas had their own 39.................of knitting.
0 Everyday tasks like looking after 40.................were done while knitting.
60
-> n p. 125 s p. 113
READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading
Passage 1 below.
Roman shipbuilding and navigation
Shipbuilding today is based on science and ships are built using computers and sophisticated
tools. Shipbuilding in ancient Rome, however, was more of an art relying on estimation, inherited
techniques and personal experience. The Romans were not traditionally sailors but mostly land-
based people, who learned to build ships from the people that they conquered, namely the Greeks
and the Egyptians.
There are a few surviving written documents that give descriptions and representations of ancient
Roman ships, including the sails and rigging. Excavated vessels also provide some clues about
ancient shipbuilding techniques. Studies of these have taught us that ancient Roman shipbuilders
built the outer hull first, then proceeded with the frame and the rest of the ship, flanks used to
build the outer hull were initially sewn together. Starting from the 6th century BCE, they were
fixed using a method called mortise and tenon, whereby one plank locked into another without
the need for stitching. Then in the first centuries of the current era, Mediterranean shipbuilders
shifted to another shipbuilding method, still in use today, which consisted of building the frame
first and then proceeding with the hull and the other components of the ship. This method was
more systematic and dramatically shortened ship construction times. The ancient Romans built
large merchant ships and warships whose size and technology were unequalled until the 16th
century CE.
Warships were built to be lightweight and very speedy. They had to be able to sail near the coast,
which is why they had no ballast or excess load and were built with a long, narrow hull. They did
not sink when damaged and often would lie crippled on the sea’s surface following naval battles.
They had a bronze battering ram, which was used to pierce the timber hulls or break the oars of
enemy vessels. Warships used both wind (sails) and human power (oarsmen) and were therefore
very fast. Eventually, Rome’s navy became the largest and most powerful in the Mediterranean,
and the Romans had control over what they therefore called Mare Nostrum meaning ‘our sea’.
There were many kinds of warship. The ‘trireme’ was the dominant warship from the 7th to 4th
century BCE. It had rowers in the top, middle and lower levels, and approximately 50 rowers in
each bank. The rowers at the bottom had the most uncomfortable position as they were under the
other rowers and were exposed to the water entering through the oar-holes. It is worth noting that
contrary to popular perception, rowers were not slaves but mostly Roman citizens enrolled in the
military. The trireme was superseded by larger ships with even more rowers.
61
Test 3
Merchant ships were built to transport lots of cargo over long distances and at a reasonable cost.
They had a wider hull, double planking and a solid interior for added stability. Unlike warships,
their V-shaped hull was deep underwater, meaning that they could not sail too close to the coast.
They usually had two huge side rudders located off the stern and controlled by a small tiller bar
connected to a system of cables. They had from one to three masts with large square sails and a
small triangular sail at the bow. Just like warships, merchant ships used oarsmen, but coordinating
the hundreds of rowers in both types of ship was not an easy task. In order to assist them, music
would be played on an instrument, and oars would then keep time with this.
The cargo on merchant ships included raw materials (e.g. iron bars, copper, marble and granite),
and agricultural products (e.g. grain from Egypt’s Nile valley). During the Empire, Rome was a
huge city by ancient standards of about one million inhabitants. Goods from all over the world
would come to the city through the port of Pozzuoli situated west of the bay of Naples in Italy and
through the gigantic port of Ostia situated at the mouth of the Tiber River. Large merchant ships
would approach the destination port and, just like today, be intercepted by a number of towboats
that would drag them to the quay.
The time of travel along the many sailing routes could vary widely. Navigation in ancient
Rome did not rely on sophisticated instruments such as compasses but on experience, local
knowledge and observation of natural phenomena. In conditions of good visibility, seamen in the
Mediterranean often had the mainland or islands in sight, which greatly facilitated navigation. They
sailed by noting their position relative to a succession of recognisable landmarks. When weather
conditions were not good or where land was no longer visible, Roman mariners estimated directions
from the pole star or, with less accuracy, from the Sun at noon. They also estimated directions
relative to the wind and swell. Overall, shipping in ancient Roman times resembled shipping
today with large vessels regularly crossing the seas and bringing supplies from their Empire.
62
Reading
Questions 1-5
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE	if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE	if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
1	The Romans’ shipbuilding skills were passed on to the Greeks and the Egyptians.
2	Skilled craftsmen were needed for the mortise and tenon method of fixing planks.
3	The later practice used by Mediterranean shipbuilders involved building the hull
before the frame.
4	The Romans called the Mediterranean Sea Mare Nostrum because they dominated
its use.
5	Most rowers on ships were people from the Roman army.
63
Test 3
Questions 6-13
Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 6-13 on your answer sheet.
Warships and merchant ships
Warships were designed so that they were 6....................and moved
quickly. They often remained afloat after battles and were able to sail close to land as
they lacked any additional weight. A battering ram made of 7....................
was included in the design for attacking and damaging the timber and oars of
enemy ships. Warships, such as the ‘trireme’, had rowers on three different
8.....................
Unlike warships, merchant ships had a broad 9....................that lay far
below the surface of the sea. Merchant ships were steered through the water with
the help of large rudders and a tiller bar. They had both square and 10.......
sails. On merchant ships and warships, 11....................was used to
ensure rowers moved their oars in and out of the water at the same time.
Quantities of agricultural goods such as 12....................were transported
by merchant ships to two main ports in Italy. The ships were pulled to the shore by
13.....................When the weather was clear and they could see islands
or land, sailors used landmarks that they knew to help them navigate their route.
64
-> 0 p. 126
Reading
READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 below.
Climate change reveals ancient artefacts in Norway’s glaciers
A Well above the treeline in Norway’s highest mountains, ancient fields of ice are shrinking
as Earth’s climate warms. As the ice has vanished, it has been giving up the treasures it has
preserved in cold storage for the last 6,000 years - items such as ancient arrows and skis
from Viking Age* traders. And those artefacts have provided archaeologists with some
surprising insights into how ancient Norwegians made their livings.
B Organic materials like textiles and hides are relatively rare finds at archaeological sites.
This is because unless they’re protected from the microorganisms that cause decay, they
tend not to last long. Extreme cold is one reliable way to keep artefacts relatively fresh
for a few thousand years, but once thawed out, these materials experience degradation
relatively swiftly.
With climate change shrinking ice cover around the world, glacial archaeologists need to
race the clock to find newly revealed artefacts, preserve them, and study them. If something
fragile dries and is windblown it might very soon be lost to science, or an arrow might
be exposed and then covered again by the next snow and remain well-preserved. The
unpredictability means that glacial archaeologists have to be systematic in their approach
to fieldwork.
C Over a nine-year period, a team of archaeologists, which included Ears Pile of Oppland
County Council, Norway, and James Barrett of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological
Research, surveyed patches of ice in Oppland, an area of south-central Norway that is home
to some of the country’s highest mountains. Reindeer once congregated on these icy patches
in the later summer months to escape biting insects, and from the late Stone Age**, hunters
followed. In addition, trade routes threaded through the mountain passes of Oppland, linking
settlements in Norway to the rest of Europe.
The slow but steady movement of glaciers tends to destroy anything at their bases, so the
team focused on stationary patches of ice, mostly above 1,400 metres. That ice is found
amid fields of frost-weathered boulders, fallen rocks, and exposed bedrock that for nine
months of the year is buried beneath snow.
‘Fieldwork is hard work - hiking with all our equipment, often camping on permafrost -
but very rewarding. You’re rescuing the archaeology, bringing the melting ice to wider
attention, discovering a unique environmental history and really connecting with the natural
environment,’ says Barrett.
'Viking Age: a period of European history from around 700 CE to around 1050 CE when Scandinavian Vikings migrated throughout
Europe by means of trade and warfare
" The Stone Age: a period in early history that began about 3.4 million years ago
65
Test 3
D At the edges of the contracting ice patches, archaeologists found more than 2,000
artefacts, which formed a material record that ran from 4,000 BCE to the beginnings of the
Renaissance in the 14th century. Many of the artefacts are associated with hunting. Hunters
would have easily misplaced arrows and they often discarded broken bows rather than take
them all the way home. Other items could have been used by hunters traversing the high
mountain passes of Oppland: all-purpose items like tools, skis, and horse tack.
E Barrett’s team radiocarbon-dated 153 of the artefacts and compared those dates to the timing
of major environmental changes in the region - such as periods of cooling or warming - and
major social and economic shifts - such as the growth of farming settlements and the spread
of international trade networks leading up to the Viking Age. They found that some periods
had produced lots of artefacts, which indicates that people had been pretty active in the
mountains during those times. But there were few or no signs of activity during other periods.
F What was surprising, according to Barrett, was the timing of these periods. Oppland's
mountains present daunting terrain and in periods of extreme cold, glaciers could block the
higher mountain passes and make travel in the upper reaches of the mountains extremely
difficult. Archaeologists assumed people would stick to lower elevations during a time
like the Late Antique Little Ice Age, a short period of deeper-than-usual cold from about
536-600 CE. But it turned out that hunters kept regularly venturing into the mountains
even when the climate turned cold, based on the amount of stuff they had apparently
dropped there.
‘Remarkably, though, the finds from the ice may have continued through this period,
perhaps suggesting that the importance of mountain hunting increased to supplement
failing agricultural harvests in times of low temperatures,’ says Barrett. A colder turn in the
Scandinavian climate would likely have meant widespread crop failures, so more people
would have depended on hunting to make up for those losses.
G Many of the artefacts Barrett’s team recovered date from the beginning of the Viking Age,
the 700s through to the 900s CE. Trade networks connecting Scandinavia with Europe and
the Middle East were expanding around this time. Although we usually think of ships when
we think of Scandinavian expansion, these recent discoveries show that plenty of goods
travelled on overland routes, like the mountain passes of Oppland. And growing Norwegian
towns, along with export markets, would have created a booming demand for hides to fight
off the cold, as well as antlers to make useful things like combs. Business must have been
good for hunters.
H Norway’s mountains are probably still hiding a lot of history - and prehistory - in remote
ice patches. When Barrett’s team looked at the dates for their sample of 153 artefacts,
they noticed a gap with almost no artefacts from about 3,800 to 2,200 BCE. In fact,
archaeological finds from that period are rare all over Norway. The researchers say that
could be because many of those artefacts have already disintegrated or are still frozen in the
ice. That means archaeologists could be extracting some of those artefacts from retreating
ice in years to come.
66
Reading
Questions 14-19
Reading Passage 2 has eight sections, A-H.
Which section contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.
14	an explanation for weapons being left behind in the mountains
15	a reference to the physical difficulties involved in an archaeological expedition
16	an explanation of why less food may have been available
17	a reference to the possibility of future archaeological discoveries
18	examples of items that would have been traded
19	a reference to the pressure archaeologists are under to work quickly
Questions 20-22
Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 20-22 on your answer sheet.
Interesting finds at an archaeological site
Organic materials such as animal skins and textiles are not discovered very often at
archaeological sites. They have little protection against 20.....................,
which means that they decay relatively quickly. But this is not always the case.
If temperatures are low enough, fragile artefacts can be preserved for thousands
of years.
A team of archaeologists have been working in the mountains in Oppland in Norway
to recover artefacts revealed by shrinking ice cover. In the past, there were trade
routes through these mountains and 21.....................gathered there in
the summer months to avoid being attacked by 22.....................on lower
ground. The people who used these mountains left things behind and it is those
objects that are of interest to archaeologists.
67
Test 3
Questions 23 and 24
Choose TWO letters, A-E
Write the correct letters in boxes 23 and 24 on your answer sheet.
Which TWO of the following statements does the writer make about the discoveries of
Barrett’s team?
A Artefacts found in the higher mountain passes were limited to
skiing equipment.
B Hunters went into the mountains even during periods of extreme cold.
C The number of artefacts from certain time periods was relatively low.
D Radiocarbon dating of artefacts produced some unreliable results.
E More artefacts were found in Oppland than at any other mountain site.
Questions 25 and 26
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Write the correct letters in boxes 25 and 26 on your answer sheet.
Which TWO of the following statements does the writer make about the Viking Age?
A Hunters at this time benefited from an increased demand for goods.
B The beginning of the period saw the greatest growth in the wealth of Vikings.
C Vikings did not rely on ships alone to transport goods.
D Norwegian towns at this time attracted traders from around the world.
E Vikings were primarily interested in their trading links with the Middle East.
68
-> 0 p. 126
Reading
READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 below.
Plant ‘thermometer’ triggers springtime growth by
measuring night-time heat
A photoreceptor molecule in plant cells has been found to have a second job
as a thermometer after dark - allowing plants to read seasonal temperature
changes. Scientists say the discovery could help breed crops that are more
resilient to the temperatures expected to result from climate change
A An international team of scientists led by the University of Cambridge has
discovered that the ‘thermometer’ molecule in plants enables them to develop
according to seasonal temperature changes. Researchers have revealed that
molecules called phytochromes - used by plants to detect light during the day -
actually change their function in darkness to become cellular temperature gauges
that measure the heat of the night.
The new findings, published in the journal Science, show that phytochromes control
genetic switches in response to temperature as well as light to dictate plant development.
B At night, these molecules change states, and the pace at which they change is
‘directly proportional to temperature’, say scientists, who compare phytochromes
to mercury in a thermometer. The warmer it is, the faster the molecular change -
stimulating plant growth.
C Farmers and gardeners have known for hundreds of years how responsive plants are
to temperature: warm winters cause many trees and flowers to bud early, something
humans have long used to predict weather and harvest times for the coming year. The
latest research pinpoints for the first time a molecular mechanism in plants that reacts
to temperature - often triggering the buds of spring we long to see at the end of winter.
D With weather and temperatures set to become ever more unpredictable due to
climate change, researchers say the discovery that this light-sensing molecule also
functions as the internal thermometer in plant cells could help us breed tougher
crops. ‘It is estimated that agricultural yields will need to double by 2050, but
climate change is a major threat to achieving this. Key crops such as wheat and rice
are sensitive to high temperatures. Thermal stress reduces crop yields by around
10% for every one degree increase in temperature,’ says lead researcher Dr Philip
Wigge from Cambridge’s Sainsbury Laboratory. ‘Discovering the molecules that
allow plants to sense temperature has the potential to accelerate the breeding of
crops resilient to thermal stress and climate change.’
69
Test 3
E In their active state, phytochrome molecules bind themselves to DNA to restrict
plant growth. During the day, sunlight activates the molecules, slowing down
growth. If a plant finds itself in shade, phytochromes are quickly inactivated -
enabling it to grow faster to find sunlight again. This is how plants compete to
escape each other’s shade. ‘Light-driven changes to phytochrome activity occur very
fast, in less than a second,’ says Wigge.
At night, however, it’s a different story. Instead of a rapid deactivation following
sundown, the molecules gradually change from their active to inactive state. This is
called ‘dark reversion’. ‘Just as mercury rises in a thermometer, the rate at which
phytochromes revert to their inactive state during the night is a direct measure of
temperature,’ says Wigge.
F ‘The lower the temperature, the slower the rate at which phytochromes revert to
inactivity, so the molecules spend more time in their active, growth-suppressing
state. This is why plants are slower to grow in winter. Warm temperatures accelerate
dark reversion, so that phytochromes rapidly reach an inactive state and detach
themselves from the plant’s DNA - allowing genes to be expressed and plant growth
to resume.’ Wigge believes phytochrome thermo-sensing evolved at a later stage,
and co-opted the biological network already used for light-based growth during the
downtime of night.
G Some plants mainly use day length as an indicator of the season. Other species, such
as daffodils, have considerable temperature sensitivity, and can flower months in
advance during a warm winter. In fact, the discovery of the dual role of phytochr omes
provides the science behind a well-known rhyme long used to predict the coming
season: oak before ash we’ll have a splash, ash before oak we’re in for a soak.
Wigge explains: ‘Oak trees rely much more on temperature, likely using
phytochromes as thermometers to dictate development, whereas ash trees rely on
measuring day length to determine their seasonal timing. A warmer spring, and
consequently a higher likeliness of a hot summer, will result in oak leafing before
ash. A cold spring will see the opposite. As the British know only too well, a colder
summer is likely to be a rain-soaked one.’
H The new findings are the culmination of twelve years of research involving scientists
from Germany, Argentina and the US, as well as the Cambridge team. The work was
done in a model system, using a mustard plant called Arabidopsis, but Wigge says
the phytochrome genes necessary for temperature sensing are found in crop plants as
well. ‘Recent advances in plant genetics now mean that scientists are able to rapidly
identify the genes controlling these processes in crop plants, and even alter their
activity using precise molecular “scalpels”,’ adds Wigge. ‘Cambridge is uniquely
well-positioned to do this kind of research as we have outstanding collaborators
nearby who work on more applied aspects of plant biology, and can help us transfer
this new knowledge into the field.’
70
Reading
Questions 27-32
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
27	The Cambridge scientists’ discovery of the ‘thermometer molecule’ caused surprise
among other scientists.
28	The target for agricultural production by 2050 could be missed.
29	Wheat and rice suffer from a rise in temperatures.
30	It may be possible to develop crops that require less water.
31	Plants grow faster in sunlight than in shade.
32	Phytochromes change their state at the same speed day and night.
Questions 33-37
Reading Passage 3 has eight sections, A-H.
Which section contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 33-37 on your answer sheet.
33	mention of specialists who can make use of the research findings
34	a reference to a potential benefit of the research findings
35	scientific support for a traditional saying
36	a reference to people traditionally making plans based on plant behaviour
37	a reference to where the research has been reported
71
Test 3
Questions 38-40
Complete the sentences below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 38-40 on your answer sheet.
38	Daffodils are likely to flower early in response to.....................weather.
39	If ash trees come into leaf before oak trees, the weather in......................
will probably be wet.
40	The research was carried out using a particular species of......................
72
 p. 126
WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The plans below show the site of an airport now and how it will look after
redevelopment next year.
Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and
make comparisons where relevant.
Write at least 150 words.
SOUTHWEST AIRPORT
NOW
AFTER DEVELOPMENT
© Check-in
@ Cafe
HI Walkway
|®-®| Gates
© ®	Check-in Bag drop
D	Cafe
HI	ATM
W	Sky train
	Car hire
l®-@l	Gates
p. 135	73
Test 3
WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
Many manufactured food and drink products contain high levels of sugar,
which causes many health problems. Sugary products should be made more
expensive to encourage people to consume less sugar.
Do you agree or disagree?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own
knowledge or experience.
Write at least 250 words.
74
p. 136
SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks you about yourself, your home, work or studies and other
familiar topics.
EXAMPLE
Summer
•	Is summer your favourite time of year? [Why/Why not?]
•	What do you do in summer when the weather’s very hot? [Why?]
•	Do you go on holiday every summer? [Why/Why not?]
•	Did you enjoy the summer holidays when you were at school? [Why/Why not?]
PART 2
Describe a luxury item you would like to own in
the future.
You should say:
what item you would like to own
what this item looks like
why you would like to own this item
and explain whether you think you will ever own
this item.
You will have to talk
about the topic for one
to two minutes. You
have one minute to
think about what you
are going to say. You
can make some notes
to help you if you wish.
PART 3
Discussion topics:
Expensive items
Example questions:
Which expensive items would many young people (in your country) like to buy?
How do the expensive items that younger people want to buy differ from those that older
people want to buy?
Do you think that people are more likely to buy expensive items for their friends or for
themselves?
Rich people
Example questions:
How difficult is it to become very rich in today’s world?
Do you agree that money does not necessarily bring happiness?
In what ways might rich people use their money to help society?
75
Test 4
LISTENING
PART 1 Questions 1-10
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ANDIOR A NUMBER for each answer.
Holiday rental
Owners’ names: Jack Fitzgerald and Shirley Fitzgerald
Granary Cottage
•	available for week beginning 1.....................May
•	cost for the week: 2 £.....................
3.....................Cottage
•	cost for the week: £480
•	building was originally a 4.....................
•	walk through doors from living room into a 5.....................
•	several 6.....................spaces at the front
•	bathroom has a shower
•	central heating and stove that burns 7.....................
•	views of old 8.....................from living room
•	view of hilltop 9.....................from the bedroom
Payment
•	deposit: £144
•	deadline for final payment: end of 10.....................
76
-> Op. 127 M p. 115
Listening
PART 2 Questions 11-20
Questions 11-14
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.
Local council report on traffic and highways
11	A survey found people’s main concern about traffic in the area was
A cuts to public transport.
B poor maintenance of roads.
C changes in the type of traffic.
12	Which change will shortly be made to the cycle path next to the river?
A	It will	be widened.
B	It will	be extended.
C	It will	be resurfaced.
13	Plans for a pedestrian crossing have been postponed because
A the Post Office has moved.
B the proposed location is unsafe.
C funding is not available at present.
14	On Station Road, notices have been erected
A telling cyclists not to leave their bikes outside the station ticket office.
B asking motorists to switch off engines when waiting at the level crossing.
C warning pedestrians to leave enough time when crossing the railway line.
77
Test 4
Questions 15-20
Label the map below.
Write the correct letter, A-l, next to Questions 15-20.
Recreation ground after proposed changes
15	New car park
16	New cricket pitch
17	Children’s playground
18	Skateboard ramp
19	Pavilion
20	Notice board
78
4 0p. 127 V p. 116
Listening
PART 3 Questions 21-30
Questions 21-22
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO benefits of city bike-sharing schemes do the students agree are the
most important?
A	reducing noise pollution
B	reducing traffic congestion
C	improving air quality
D	encouraging health and fitness
E	making cycling affordable
Questions 23-24
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO things do the students think are necessary for successful bike-sharing
schemes?
A Bikes should have a GPS system.
B The app should be easy to use.
C Public awareness should be raised.
D Only one scheme should be available.
E There should be a large network of cycle lanes.
79
Test 4
Questions 25-30
What is the speakers’ opinion of the bike-sharing schemes in each of the
following cities?
Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to
Questions 25-30.
Opinion of bike-sharing scheme
A They agree it has been disappointing.
B They think it should be cheaper.
C They are surprised it has been so successful.
D They agree that more investment is required.
E They think the system has been well designed.
F They disagree about the reasons for its success.
G They think it has expanded too quickly.
Cities
25	Amsterdam	........
26	Dublin	........
27	London	........
28	Buenos Aires	........
29	New York	........
30	Sydney	........
80	-» B p. 127 B p. 117
Listening
PART 4 Questions 31-40
Complete the notes below.
Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.
THE EXTINCTION OF THE DODO BIRD
The dodo was a large flightless bird which used to inhabit the island of Mauritius.
History
•	1507 - Portuguese ships transporting 31.....................stopped at
the island to collect food and water.
©	1638 - The Dutch established a 32.....................on the island.
•	They killed the dodo birds for their meat.
•	The last one was killed in 1681.
Description
® The only record we have is written descriptions and pictures (possibly
unreliable).
® A Dutch painting suggests the dodo was very 33......................
» The only remaining soft tissue is a dried 34......................
•	Recent studies of a dodo skeleton suggest the birds were capable of rapid
35......................
•	It’s thought they were able to use their small wings to maintain
36......................
•	Their 37.....................was of average size.
•	Their sense of 38.....................enabled them to find food.
Reasons for extinction
•	Hunting was probably not the main cause.
•	Sailors brought dogs and monkeys.
•	39.....................also escaped onto the island and ate the birds’ eggs.
•	The arrival of farming meant the 40.....................was destroyed.
4Op. 127 N p. 119	81
Test 4
READING
READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading
Passage 1 below.
Roman tunnels
The Romans, who once controlled areas of Europe, North Africa and
Asia Minor, adopted the construction techniques of other civilizations to
build tunnels in their territories
The Persians, who lived in present-day Iran, were one of the first civilizations to build tunnels
that provided a reliable supply of water to human settlements in dry areas. In the early first
millennium BCE, they introduced the qanat method of tunnel construction, which consisted
of placing posts over a hill in a straight line, to ensure that the tunnel kept to its route, and then
digging vertical shafts down into the ground at regular intervals. Underground, workers removed
the earth from between the ends of the shafts, creating a tunnel. The excavated soil was taken up
to the surface using the shafts, which also provided ventilation during the work. Once the tunnel
was completed, it allowed water to flow from the top of a hillside down towards a canal, which
supplied water for human use. Remarkably, some qanats built by the Persians 2,700 years ago are
still in use today.
They later passed on their knowledge to the Romans, who also used the qanat method to
construct water-supply tunnels for agriculture. Roman qanat tunnels were constructed with
vertical shafts dug at intervals of between 30 and 60 meters. The shafts were equipped with
handholds and footholds to help those climbing in and out of them and were covered with a
wooden or stone lid. To ensure that the shafts were vertical, Romans hung a plumb line from a
rod placed across the top of each shaft and made sure that the weight at the end of it hung in the
center of the shaft. Plumb lines were also used to measure the depth of the shaft and to determine
the slope of the tunnel. The 5.6-kilometer-long Claudius tunnel, built in 41 CE to drain the Fucine
Lake in central Italy, had shafts that were up to 122 meters deep, took 11 years to build and
involved approximately 30,000 workers.
By the 6th century BCE, a second method of tunnel construction appeared called the counter-
excavation method, in which the tunnel was constructed from both ends. It was used to cut
through high mountains when the qanat method was not a practical alternative. This method
required greater planning and advanced knowledge of surveying, mathematics and geometry
as both ends of a tunnel had to meet correctly at the center of the mountain. Adjustments to the
direction of the tunnel also had to be made whenever builders encountered geological problems
or when it deviated from its set path. They constantly checked the tunnel’s advancing direction,
82
Reading
for example, by looking back at the light that penetrated thr ough the tunnel mouth, and made
corrections whenever necessary. Large deviations could happen, and they could result in one end
of the tunnel not being usable. An inscription written on the side of a 428-meter tunnel, built by
the Romans as part of the Saldae aqueduct system in modern-day Algeria, describes how the two
teams of builders missed each other in the mountain and how the later construction of a lateral
link between both corridors corrected the initial error.
The Romans dug tunnels for their roads using the counter-excavation method, whenever they
encountered obstacles such as hills or mountains that were too high for roads to pass over.
An example is the 37-meter-long, 6-meter-high, Furlo Pass Tunnel built in Italy in 69-79 CE.
Remarkably, a modern road still uses this tunnel today. Tunnels were also built for mineral
extraction. Miners would locate a mineral vein and then pursue it with shafts and tunnels
underground. Traces of such tunnels used to mine gold can still be found at the Dolaucothi mines
in Wales. When the sole purpose of a tunnel was mineral extraction, construction required less
planning, as the tunnel route was determined by the mineral vein.
Roman tunnel projects were carefully planned and carried out. The length of time it took to
construct a tunnel depended on the method being used and the type of rock being excavated. The
qanat construction method was usually faster than the counter-excavation method as it was more
straightforward. This was because the mountain could be excavated not only from the tunnel
mouths but also from shafts. The type of rock could also influence construction times. When
the rock was hard, the Romans employed a technique called fire quenching which consisted of
heating the rock with fire, and then suddenly cooling it with cold water so that it would crack.
Progress through hard rock could be very slow, and it was not uncommon for tunnels to take
years, if not decades, to be built. Construction marks left on a Roman tunnel in Bologna show that
the rate of advance through solid rock was 30 centimeters per day. In contrast, the rate of advance
of the Claudius tunnel can be calculated at 1.4 meters per day. Most tunnels had inscriptions
showing the names of patrons who ordered construction and sometimes the name of the architect.
For example, the 1,4-kilometer Qevlik tunnel in Turkey, built to divert the floodwater threatening
the harbor of the ancient city of Seleuceia Pieria, had inscriptions on the entrance, still visible
today, that also indicate that the tunnel was started in 69 CE and was completed in 81 CE.
83
Test 4
Questions 1-6
Label the diagrams below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet.
The Persian Qanat Method
vertical shafts to remove earth and for 3___________________________
Cross-section of a Roman Qanat Shaft
made of wood or stone
attached to the plumb line
handholds and footholds used for 6
84
Reading
Questions 7-10
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?
In boxes 7-10 on your answer sheet, write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
7	The counter-excavation method completely replaced the qanat method in the
6th century BCE.
8	Only experienced builders were employed to construct a tunnel using the counter-
excavation method.
9	The information about a problem that occurred during the construction of the
Saldae aqueduct system was found in an ancient book.
10	The mistake made by the builders of the Saldae aqueduct system was that the two
parts of the tunnel failed to meet.
Questions 11-13
Answer the questions below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 11-13 on your answer sheet.
11	What type of mineral were the Dolaucothi mines in Wales built to extract?
12	In addition to the patron, whose name might be carved onto a tunnel?
13	What part of Seleuceia Pieria was the Qevlik tunnel built to protect?
0 p. 128
85
Test 4
READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 below.
Changes in reading habits
What are the implications of the way we read today?
Look around on your next plane trip. The iPad is the new pacifier for babies and toddlers. Younger
school-aged children read stories on smartphones; older kids don’t read at all, but hunch over
video games. Parents and other passengers read on tablets or skim a flotilla of email and news
feeds. Unbeknown to most of us, an invisible, game-changing transformation links everyone
in this picture: the neuronal circuit that underlies the brain’s ability to read is subtly, rapidly
changing and this has implications for everyone from the pre-reading toddler to the expert adult.
As work in neurosciences indicates, the acquisition of literacy necessitated a new circuit in our
species’ brain more than 6,000 years ago. That circuit evolved from a very simple mechanism
for decoding basic information, like the number of goats in one’s herd, to the present, highly
elaborated reading brain. My research depicts how the present reading brain enables the
development of some of our most important intellectual and affective processes: internalized
knowledge, analogical reasoning, and inference; perspective-taking and empathy; critical analysis
and the generation of insight. Research surfacing in many parts of the world now cautions that
each of these essential ‘deep reading’ processes may be under threat as we move into digital-
based modes of reading.
This is not a simple, binary issue of print versus digital reading and technological innovation. As
MIT scholar Sherry Turkle has written, we do not err as a society when we innovate but when
we ignore what we disrupt or diminish while innovating. In this hinge moment between print and
digital cultures, society needs to confront what is diminishing in the expert reading circuit, what
our children and older students are not developing, and what we can do about it.
We know from research that the reading circuit is not given to human beings through a genetic
blueprint like vision or language; it needs an environment to develop. Further, it will adapt to that
environment’s requirements - from different writing systems to the characteristics of whatever
medium is used. If the dominant medium advantages processes that are fast, multi-task oriented
and well-suited for large volumes of information, like the current digital medium, so will the
reading circuit. As UCLA psychologist Patricia Greenfield writes, the result is that less attention
and time will be allocated to slower, time-demanding deep reading processes.
Increasing reports from educators and from researchers in psychology and the humanities bear
this out. English literature scholar and teacher Mark Edmundson describes how many college
students actively avoid the classic literature of the 19th and 20th centuries in favour of something
simpler as they no longer have the patience to read longer, denser, more difficult texts. We should
86
Reading
be less concerned with students’ ‘cognitive impatience’, however, than by what may underlie
it: the potential inability of large numbers of students to read with a level of critical analysis
sufficient to comprehend the complexity of thought and argument found in more demanding texts.
Multiple studies show that digital screen use may be causing a variety of troubling downstream
effects on reading comprehension in older high school and college students. In Stavanger,
Norway, psychologist Anne Mangen and her colleagues studied how high school students
comprehend the same material in different mediums. Mangen’s group asked subjects questions
about a short story whose plot had universal student appeal; half of the students read the story
on a tablet, the other half in paperback. Results indicated that students who read on print were
superior in their comprehension to screen-reading peers, particularly in their ability to sequence
detail and reconstruct the plot in chronological order.
Ziming Liu from San Jose State University has conducted a series of studies which indicate that
the ‘new norm’ in reading is skimming, involving word-spotting and browsing through the text.
Many readers now use a pattern when reading in which they sample the first line and then word-
spot thr ough the rest of the text. When the reading brain skims like this, it reduces time allocated
to deep reading processes. In other words, we don’t have time to grasp complexity, to understand
another’s feelings, to perceive beauty, and to create thoughts of the reader’s own.
The possibility that critical analysis, empathy and other deep reading processes could become
the unintended ‘collateral damage’ of our digital culture is not a straightforward binary issue
about print versus digital reading. It is about how we all have begun to read on various mediums
and how that changes not only what we read, but also the purposes for which we read. Nor is it
only about the young. The subtle atrophy of critical analysis and empathy affects us all equally. It
affects our ability to navigate a constant bombardment of information. It incentivizes a retreat to
the most familiar stores of unchecked information, which require and receive no analysis, leaving
us susceptible to false information and irrational ideas.
There’s an old rule in neuroscience that does not alter with age: use it or lose it. It is a very
hopeful principle when applied to critical thought in the reading brain because it implies choice.
The story of the changing reading brain is hardly finished. We possess both the science and the
technology to identify and redress the changes in how we read before they become entrenched. If
we work to understand exactly what we will lose, alongside the extraordinary new capacities that
the digital world has brought us, there is as much reason for excitement as caution.
87
Test 4
Questions 14-17
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter in boxes 14-17 on your answer sheet.
14	What is the writer’s main point in the first paragraph?
A Our use of technology is having a hidden effect on us.
B Technology can be used to help youngsters to read.
C	Travellers should be encouraged to use technology on planes.
D	Playing games is a more popular use of technology than reading.
15	What main point does Sherry Turkle make about innovation?
A Technological innovation has led to a reduction in print reading.
B	We should pay attention to what might be lost when innovation occurs.
C	We should encourage more young people to become involved in innovation.
D There is a difference between developing products and developing ideas.
16	What point is the writer making in the fourth paragraph?
A Humans have an inborn ability to read and write.
B Reading can be done using many different mediums.
C Writing systems make unexpected demands on the brain.
D Some brain circuits adjust to whatever is required of them.
17	According to Mark Edmundson, the attitude of college students
A has changed the way he teaches.
B has influenced what they select to read.
C	does not worry him as much as it does others.
D	does not match the views of the general public.
88
Reading
Questions 18-22
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-H, below.
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 18-22 on your answer sheet.
Studies on digital screen use
There have been many studies on digital screen use, showing some 18...............
trends. Psychologist Anne Mangen gave high-school students a short story to read, half
using digital and half using print mediums. Her team then used a question-and-answer
technique to find out how 19...............each group's understanding of the plot
was. The findings showed a clear pattern in the responses, with those who read screens
finding the order of information 20...............to recall.
Studies by Ziming Liu show that students are tending to read 21...............
words and phrases in a text to save time. This approach, she says, gives the reader a
superficial understanding of the 22...............content of material, leaving no time
for thought.
A	fast	B	isolated	C	emotional	D	worrying
E	many	F	hard	G	combined	H	thorough
Questions 23-26
Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 2?
In boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet, write
YES	if the statement agrees with the views of the writer
NO	if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
23	The medium we use to read can affect our choice of reading content.
24	Some age groups are more likely to lose their complex reading skills than others.
25	False information has become more widespread in today’s digital era.
26	We still have opportunities to rectify the problems that technology is presenting.
4 0p. 128
89
Test 4
READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 on pages 91 and 92.
Questions 27-32
Reading Passage 3 has six sections, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet.
List of Headings
i	An increasing divergence of attitudes towards Al
ii	Reasons why we have more faith in human judgement than in Al
iii	The superiority of Al projections over those made by humans
iv	The process by which Al can help us make good decisions
v	The advantages of involving users in Al processes
vi	Widespread distrust of an Al innovation
vii	Encouraging openness about how Al functions
viii	A surprisingly successful Al application
27	Section A
28	Section B
29	Section C
30	Section D
31	Section E
32	Section F
90
Reading
Attitudes towards Artificial Intelligence
A Artificial intelligence (Al) can already predict the future. Police forces are using it
to map when and where crime is likely to occur. Doctors can use it to predict when a
patient is most likely to have a heart attack or stroke. Researchers are even trying to
give Al imagination so it can plan for unexpected consequences.
Many decisions in our lives require a good forecast, and Al is almost always better
at forecasting than we are. Yet for all these technological advances, we still seem to
deeply lack confidence in Al predictions. Recent cases show that people don’t like
relying on Al and prefer to trust human experts, even if these experts are wrong.
If we want Al to really benefit people, we need to find a way to get people to trust
it. To do that, we need to understand why people are so reluctant to trust Al in the
first place.
B Take the case of Watson for Oncology, one of technology giant IBM’s
supercomputer programs. Their attempt to promote this program to cancer doctors
was a PR disaster. The Al promised to deliver top-quality recommendations on
the treatment of 12 cancers that accounted for 80% of the world’s cases. But when
doctors first interacted with Watson, they found themselves in a rather difficult
situation. On the one hand, if Watson provided guidance about a treatment that
coincided with their own opinions, physicians did not see much point in Watson’s
recommendations. The supercomputer was simply telling them what they already
knew, and these recommendations did not change the actual treatment.
On the other hand, if Watson generated a recommendation that contradicted the
experts’ opinion, doctors would typically conclude that Watson wasn’t competent.
And the machine wouldn’t be able to explain why its treatment was plausible
because its machine-learning algorithms were simply too complex to be fully
understood by humans. Consequently, this has caused even more suspicion
and disbelief, leading many doctors to ignore the seemingly outlandish Al
recommendations and stick to their own expertise.
C This is just one example of people’s lack of confidence in Al and their reluctance to
accept what Al has to offer. Trust in other people is often based on our understanding
of how others think and having experience of their reliability. This helps create
a psychological feeling of safety. Al, on the other hand, is still fairly new and
unfamiliar to most people. Even if it can be technically explained (and that’s not
always the case), Al’s decision-making process is usually too difficult for most
people to comprehend. And interacting with something we don’t understand can
cause anxiety and give us a sense that we’re losing control.
91
Test 4
Many people are also simply not familiar with many instances of Al actually
working, because it often happens in the background. Instead, they are acutely
aware of instances where Al goes wrong. Embarrassing Al failures receive a
disproportionate amount of media attention, emphasising the message that we
cannot rely on technology. Machine learning is not foolproof, in part because the
humans who design it aren’t.
D Feelings about Al run deep. In a recent experiment, people from a range of
backgrounds were given various sci-fi films about Al to watch and then asked
questions about automation in everyday life. It was found that, regardless of whether
the film they watched depicted Al in a positive or negative light, simply watching
a cinematic vision of our technological future polarised the participants’ attitudes.
Optimists became more extreme in their enthusiasm for Al and sceptics became
even more guarded.
This suggests people use relevant evidence about Al in a biased manner to support
their existing attitudes, a deep-rooted human tendency known as “confirmation
bias”. As Al is represented more and more in media and entertainment, it could lead
to a society split between those who benefit from Al and those who reject it. More
pertinently, refusing to accept the advantages offered by Al could place a large group
of people at a serious disadvantage.
E Fortunately, we already have some ideas about how to improve trust in AL Simply
having previous experience with Al can significantly improve people’s opinions
about the technology, as was found in the study mentioned above. Evidence also
suggests the more you use other technologies such as the internet, the more you
trust them.
Another solution may be to reveal more about the algorithms which Al uses and
the purposes they serve. Several high-profile social media companies and online
marketplaces already release transparency reports about government requests and
surveillance disclosures. A similar practice for Al could help people have a better
understanding of the way algorithmic decisions are made.
F Research suggests that allowing people some control over Al decision-making could
also improve trust and enable Al to learn from human experience. For example,
one study showed that when people were allowed the freedom to slightly modify an
algorithm, they felt more satisfied with its decisions, more likely to believe it was
superior and more likely to use it in the future.
We don’t need to understand the intricate inner workings of Al systems, but if
people are given a degree of responsibility for how they are implemented, they will
be more willing to accept Al into their lives.
92
Reading
Questions 33-35
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter in boxes 33-35 on your answer sheet.
33	What is the writer doing in Section A?
A providing a solution to a concern
B justifying an opinion about an issue
C highlighting the existence of a problem
D explaining the reasons for a phenomenon
34	According to Section C, why might some people be reluctant to accept Al?
A They are afraid it will replace humans in decision-making jobs.
B Its complexity makes them feel that they are at a disadvantage.
C They would rather wait for the technology to be tested over a period of time.
D Misunderstandings about how it works make it seem more challenging
than it is.
35	What does the writer say about the media in Section C of the text?
A It leads the public to be mistrustful of Al.
B	It devotes an excessive amount of attention to Al.
C	Its reports of incidents involving Al are often inaccurate.
D It gives the impression that Al failures are due to designer error.
93
Test 4
Questions 36-40
Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3?
In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write
YES	if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO	if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
36	Subjective depictions of Al in sci-fi films make people change their opinions about
automation.
37	Portrayals of Al in media and entertainment are likely to become more positive.
38	Rejection of the possibilities of Al may have a negative effect on many people’s
lives.
39	Familiarity with Al has very little impact on people’s attitudes to the technology.
40	Al applications which users are able to modify are more likely to gain consumer
approval.
94
4 0p. 128
WRITING
WRITING TASK 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on this task.
The diagram below shows the process for recycling plastic bottles.
Summarise the information by selecting and reporting the main features, and
make comparisons where relevant.
Write at least 150 words.
How plastic bottles are recycled
(3) Recycling centre: Sorting
I
(4) Compressing
Into blocks
(§) Crushing
-> p. 137
95
Test 4
WRITING TASK 2
You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
In the future all cars, buses and trucks will be driverless. The only people
travelling inside these vehicles will be passengers.
Do you think the advantages of driverless vehicles outweigh the
disadvantages?
Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own
knowledge or experience.
Write at least 250 words.
96
p. 138
SPEAKING
PART 1
The examiner asks you about yourself, your home, work or studies and other
familiar topics.
EXAMPLE
Fast food
o What kinds of fast food have you tried? [Why/Why not?]
•	Do you ever use a microwave to cook food quickly? [Why/Why not?]
•	How popular are fast food restaurants where you live? [Why/Why not?]
® When would you go to a fast-food restaurant? [Why/Why not?]
PART 2
Describe some technology (e.g. an app, phone,
software program) that you decided to stop using.
You should say:
when and where you got this technology
why you started using this technology
why you decided to stop using it
and explain how you feel about the decision
you made.
You will have to talk
about the topic for one
to two minutes. You
have one minute to
think about what you
are going to say. You
can make some notes
to help you if you wish.
PART 3
Discussion topics:
Computer games
Example questions:
What kinds of computer games do people play in your country?
Why do people enjoy playing computer games?
Do you think that all computer games should have a minimum age for players?
Technology in the classroom
Example questions:
In what ways can technology in the classroom be helpful?
Do you agree that students are often better at using technology than their teachers?
Do you believe that computers will ever replace human teachers?
97
Audioscripts
PART	1
SARAH!	Hello. Children’s Engineering Workshops.
FATHER!	Oh hello. 1 wanted some information about the workshops in the school holidays.
SARAH:	Sure.
father:	1 have two daughters who are interested. The younger one’s Lydia, she’s four - do you take children as young as that?
SARAH!	Yes, our Tiny Engineers workshop is for four to five-year-olds.
FATHER!	What sorts of activities do they do?
SARAH!	All sorts. For example, they work together to design a special cover that goes round an egg, so that when it’s inside they can drop it from a height and it doesn’t	Q1 break. Well, sometimes it does break but that’s part of the fun!
FATHER!	Right. And Lydia loves building things. Is there any opportunity for her to do that?
SARAH:	Well, they have a competition to see who can make the highest tower. You’d be	Q2 amazed how high they can go.
father:	Right.
sarah:	But they’re learning all the time as well as having fun. For example, one thing they do is to design and build a car that’s attached to a balloon, and the force of	Q3 the air in that actually powers the car and makes it move along. They go really fast too.
SARAH!	OK, well, all this sounds perfect.
father:	Now Carly, that’s my older daughter, has just had her seventh birthday, so presumably she’d be in a different group?
sarah:	Yes, she’d be in the Junior Engineers. That’s for children from six to eight.
father:	And do they do the same sorts of activities?
sarah:	Some are the same, but a bit more advanced. So they work out how to build model vehicles, things like cars and trucks, but also how to construct animals	Q4 using the same sorts of material and technique, and then they learn how they can program them and make them move.
father:	So they learn a bit of coding?
SARAH!	They do. They pick it up really quickly. We’re there to help if they need it, but they learn from one another too.
father:	Right. And do they have competitions too?
SARAH!	Yes, with the Junior Engineers, it's to use recycled materials like card and wood to build a bridge, and the longest one gets a prize.	Q5
FATHER!	That sounds fun. I wouldn’t mind doing that myself!
SARAH!	Then they have something a bit different, which is to think up an idea for a five-minute movie and then film it, using special animation software. You’d be	Q6 amazed what they come up with.
FATHER!	And of course, that’s something they can put on their phone and take home to show all their friends.
SARAH!	Exactly. And then they also build a robot in the shape of a human, and they decorate it and program it so that it can move its arms and legs.	Q7
98
Test 1
father:	Perfect. So, is it the same price as the Tiny Engineers?
SARAH:	It’s just a bit more: £50 for the five weeks.
father:	And are the classes on a Monday, too?
SARAH:	They used to be, but we found it didn’t give our staff enough time to clear up after the first workshop, so we moved them to Wednesdays. The classes are held in	Q8 the morning from ten to eleven.
father:	OK. That’s better for me actually. And what about the location? Where exactly are the workshops held?
SARAH:	They’re in building 10A - there’s a big sign on the door, you can't miss it, and that’s in Eradstone Industrial Estate.	09
father:	Sorry?
sarah:	Eradstone - that’s F-R-A-D-S-T-O-N-E.
father:	And that’s in Grasford, isn’t it?
sarah:	Yes, up past the station.
father:	And will 1 have any parking problems there?	Q10
sarah:	No, there’s always plenty available. So would you like to enrol Lydia and Carly now?
father:	OK.
sarah:	So can I have your full name ...
PART 2
Good morning, everyone, and welcome to Stevenson’s, one of the country’s major
manufacturers of metal goods. Thank you for choosing us for your two weeks of work
experience. My name is Julia Simmons, and since the beginning of this year I’ve been the
managing director.
Stevenson’s is quite an old company. Like me, the founder, Ronald Stevenson, went into
the steel industry when he left school - that was in 1923. He set up this company when he Q11
finished his apprenticeship, in 1926. although he actually started making plans two years
earlier, in 1924. He was a very determined young man!
Stevenson’s long-term plan was to manufacture components for the machine tools industry -
although in fact that never came about - and for the automotive industry, that is, cars and
lorries. However, there was a delay of five years before that happened, because shortly
before the company went into production, Stevenson was given the opportunity to make Q12
goods for hospitals and other players in the healthcare industry, so that’s what we did for the
first five years.
Over the years, we’ve expanded the premises considerably - we were lucky that the site is
big enough, so moving to a new location has never been necessary. However, the layout is Q13
far from ideal for modern machinery and production methods, so we intend to carry out major
refurbishment of this site over the next five years.
I’d better give you some idea of what you’ll be doing during your two weeks with us, so you
know what to expect. Most mornings you’ll have a presentation from one of the managers, to Q14
learn about their department, starting this morning with research and development. And you’ll
all spend some time in each department, observing what’s going on and talking to people - as
long as you don’t stop them from doing their work altogether! In the past, a teacher from your
school has come in at the end of each week to find out how the group were getting on, but
your school isn’t able to arrange that this year.
OK, now I’ll briefly help you to orientate yourselves around the site. As you can see, we’re
in the reception area, which we try to make attractive and welcoming to visitors. There’s a
99
Audioscripts
corridor running left from here, and if you go along that, the door facing you at the end is the Q15
entrance to the coffee room. This looks out onto the main road on one side, and some trees
on the other, and that’ll be where you meet each morning.
The factory is the very big room on the far side of the site. Next to it is the warehouse, which Q16
can be accessed by lorries going up the road to the turning area at the end. You can get to
the warehouse by crossing to the far side of the courtyard, and then the door is on your right.
Somewhere you’ll be keen to find is the staff canteen. This is right next to reception. I can	Q17
confidently say that the food’s very good, but the view isn’t. The windows on one side look
onto a corridor and courtyard, which aren't very attractive at all, and on the other onto the
access road, which isn’t much better.
You’ll be using the meeting room quite often, and you'll find it bv walking along the corridor to Q18
the left of the courtyard, and continuing along it to the end. The meeting room is the last one
on the right, and I’m afraid there's no natural daylight in the room.
Then you’ll need to know where some of the offices are. The human resources department is Q19
at the front of this building, so you head to the left along the corridor from reception, and it’s
the second room you come to. It looks out onto the main road.
And finally, the boardroom, where you’ll be meeting sometimes. That has quite a pleasant Q20
view, as it looks out on to the trees. Go along the corridor past the courtyard, right to the end.
The boardroom is on the left, next to the factory.
OK, now are there any questions before we ...
PART 3
jess:	How are you getting on with your art project, Tom?
tom:	OK. Like, they gave us the theme of birds to base our project on, and I'm not really all that interested in wildlife. But I’m starting to get into it. I’ve pretty well finished the introductory stage.
jess:	So have I. When they gave us all those handouts with details of books and	Q21IQ22 websites to look at. I was really put off, but the more I read, the more interested I got.
tom:	Me too. I found I could research so many different aspects of birds in art - colour, movement, texture. So I was looking forward to the Bird Park visit.
jess:	What a letdown! It poured with rain and we hardly saw a single bird. Much less Q21IQ22 use than the trip to the Natural History Museum.
tom:	Yeah. I liked all the stuff about evolution there. The workshop sessions with Dr Fletcher were good too, especially the brainstorming sessions.
jess:	I missed those because I was ill. I wish we could’ve seen the projects last year’s students did.
tom:	Mm. I suppose they want us to do our own thing, not copy.
jess:	Have you drafted your proposal yet?
tom:	Yes, but I haven’t handed it in. I need to amend some parts. I’ve realised the notes from my research are almost all just descriptions, I haven’t actually	Q23IQ24 evaluated anything. So I’ll have to fix that.
jess:	Oh, I didn’t know we had to do that. I’ll have to look at that too. Did you do a timeline for the project?
tom:	Yes, and a mind map.
jess:	Yeah, so did I. I quite enjoyed that. But it was hard having to explain the basis for my decisions in my action plan.
100